# Relevance Realization and Distributed Organization

*The Buildonomy whitepaper*

## The Argument in Three Parts

### Ontology

1. Identity is isomorphic with beliefs. What it is to be an entity is equivalent to what it is to
   hold a certain set of beliefs.

1. Beliefs come in two flavors: being beliefs and becoming beliefs.

   1. Being beliefs translate non-symbolic information streams into a representations of what and
      where the identity is within symbolic state space.
   1. Becoming beliefs represent path integrals, attractors, and other action-potentiating forces
      that guide an identity's transformation within symbolic state space.

1. Beliefs are hierarchical in nature and form a directed acyclic graph structure. The structure
   corresponds to the scale, location, and applicability of various beliefs. Certain beliefs form
   the core of an identity and are scale free in nature. Scale-free beliefs are beliefs that are
   always true so long as the identity exists.

1. Relevance is a property of information streams within an identity to affect the identity's
   beliefs.

   1. The degree of relevance for a chunk of information can be characterized by its resonance
      within the belief structure. Highly relevant information will have non-localized effects. It
      will update beliefs deeply and/or widely through the belief network.

1. For an identity to continue to exist, it must continually update its beliefs in order to fit
   itself to the world as well as fit the world to itself. This is the autopoietic
   imperative. Holding this belief enables self-preserving behavior to manifest, thereby enabling
   being-beliefs to transform into becoming beliefs and vice versa.

### Value Hypothesis

1. Organizational belief structures are not universally legible within an organization's
   participants. Therefore organizational belief updating is an extremely risky process that only a
   small portion of the organization's participants are trusted to perform.

1. If organizational beliefs were legible, then organizational belief updating could be carried out
   in a distributed fashion among the organization's participants. Each participant offers a unique
   vantage point to realize organizational relevance, as each participant has a unique background
   and situation within the organization. If this collective cognition could be harnessed,
   organizations could be more creative, nimble, and efficient.

1. Collective cognition can be yoked to organizational relevance if the following properties can
   hold:

   1. An organization's beliefs are legible to its participants such that they can model the
      resonance of any hypothesized event within the belief network of the organization.
   1. A satisfactory resolution of the principal-agent problem can align the incentives of each
      participant within the organization to the organization's best interest.

1. Organizations and their participants form relationships of fungible and non-fungible value. The
   degree to which an organization can trust a participant to act in the organization's best
   interest is dependent on how tightly integrated the participants non-fungible relationships
   are with the organization.

### Implementation Hypothesis

1. Procedures are a protocol for defining legible, executable, adaptable, trainable, and predictable
   beliefs

   1. The concept of a recipe, or more generally a procedure, maps to the core properties of a
      becoming-belief. It starts with a statement of where and when the belief can apply -- that is
      when the initial constituent elements are present. In the case of a recipe these constituents
      would include the chef, the kitchen, and the recipe ingredients. It also identifies when the
      belief should apply -- when the procedural outcome is warranted. A recipe applies when the
      dish is desired to eat, which is only true when there are hungry mouths to feed. The procedure
      than explicates a method of transforming the stocks into the final result through a series of
      intermediate transformations, each of which involves different inputs and skills to perform.

   1. When properly generalized, procedures map to both Bayesian modeling of events as well as a
      prescriptive, pedagogical, and exploratory description of how to develop new skills.

      1. By performing a recipe again and again, recording each execution within an AsRun log,
         documenting the changes introduced within each run, a model of the uncertainty and
         usefulness of the final outcome can be generated.

      1. By introducing new chefs to well-understood recipes, the chefs can learn the skills
         necessary recreate the results of the past. If they can assess their results against the
         Bayesian model of prior art, then they can evaluate their skill against what has been
         performed before.

      1. By intentionally introducing changes into well-worn procedures, predictions outcomes can be
         hypothesized and tested. Variation and novelty can be introduced and its value compared
         against prior similar-in-kind results.

1. Organizational beliefs will naturally generate small world network structures. The function of
   the dense networks within these networks will share family resemblances across many
   organizations. Each of these functions represents a meaningful specialty that requires a specific
   affectation and skill set to excel at. When specialists organize themselves
   inter-organizationally in a guild-structure using the paradigm of procedures-as-beliefs, then
   the following incentives are realized:

   1. By contributing both to the application of a specialty as well as the idea of the specialty,
      practitioners are incentivized to realize both pragmatic and epistemic value within their
      specialty. Their employer will reward them for a job that efficiently helps their coworkers,
      while their guild will reward them for exploring the adjacent possible space of the guild's
      specialization. The employer is the primary source for fungible rewards, and the guild is a
      source for renown and respect amongst a peer group. Access to this type of functional peer
      group is guaranteed source of non-fungible value for any practitioner that shares the
      affectation and/or skills of the specialty.

   1. When specialists contribute knowledge back to a guild structure, they help to build a 'guild
      brain', or a surprise-minimization engine that can act as a co-pilot for every practitioner. A
      guild brain ingests the anonymized results of procedural execution to create a model of
      expected outcomes within the guild specialty.

   1. Such a model and community has practical and self-actualizing benefits for the practitioner,
      as they have a means to dynamically educate and check themselves within the vagaries of day to
      day activities within their employment organization. By organizing in this manner,
      practitioners have the ability to collectively organize, and set a general framework for their
      compensation based on their guild-validated skills.

   1. Such a model and community has practical and self-actualizing benefits for the organization
      as well, as it enables them to cross-check the practitioner's work and easily uncover
      deception or other dishonorable behavior by comparing their results to the probabilistic
      distributions embodied by the guild brain. Organizations are liable to accept guild-based
      price negotiation because of the uncertainty reduction it brings to their workforce: 1) it is
      harder for practitioners to deceive the organization, 2) they essentially get two employees
      for the price of one, as each practitioner comes equipped with access to the guild brain, and
      3) they tap into a reliable source of non-fungible value for the practitioner. It is assumed
      that if the guild or employer uncovers evidence of deception or other punishable dishonorable
      practices, the practitioner's access to both the guild and the employer becomes extremely
      limited or removed outright.


### Growth Hypothesis

The intersection of procedures, guild-specialist collectives, and organizational information
structure is a fundamentally more efficient, quicker, and creative organizational paradigm to any
state of the art organizational information system. As such, Buildonomy represents both a sticky and
a viral growth strategy. It is sticky in that once a guild or organization adopts buildonomy, they
quickly see how procedures and the guild brain accelerate their business and skill acquisition. It
is viral in that once a practitioner adopts the system, they are incentivized to spread it across
their network in order to accrue additional value through improving the performance of their guild
brain.


## The Variability Dilemma

To survive, every organism faces a trade off between adaptability and efficiency. Organizations,
such as your company, government, or tennis club are no different. To be efficient, variability must
be constrained. Yet variability is necessary to adapt. For an organization to be successful, they
must simultaneously efficiently exploit what is currently available to them while simultaneously
exploring the *adjacent possible*^[The adjacent possible is an idea introduced by Stuart Kaufmann to
describe the set of possibilities available to exploit at any given point in time. That which is
"adjacent possible" is characterized by the possibility space of all potential combinations of what
is known into new and potentially functionally novel configurations.], the realm of potentiality by
which they may harvest new opportunities.

Organizations must be efficient and creative, yet not universally so. Efficiency and creativity must
be yoked to what is *relevant*. Traditionally organizations differentiate their internal teams to
either focus on maintaining and enhancing organizational efficiency or on creatively adapting and
evolving their organizational identity. Often, creative responsibilities are isolated within the
executive team or possibly entrusted to specialized research and development teams. Throughout the
rest of the organization, the merit of work performed is correlated with how well it conforms to
predefined expectations.

In this structure, approved organizational variation is determined by the decisions of a few central
players. This is similar to how prices are determined in a planned economy by a central department
of bureaucrats. Market driven economies are widely agreed to be more efficient, fair, and responsive
to changing circumstances than planned economies, so why are organizations consistently so
restrictive with the control of their own variability?

What if the responsibilities for internal variation were distributed more widely across an
organization? Would that not increase the organization's cognitive potential? Just as in a market
economy, each participant has access to unique information that they can feed into the aggregate
signal, information that is impossible to accrue within a centralized system because of the
fluctuating and variable nature of what is and is not relevant to any particular problem. In the
case of a market, this aggregate signal is the price of goods and services. In the case of an
organization, the signal is the amount and type of beneficial organizational variation.

What prevents an organization from acting in this more efficient manner? The difficulty lies in
properly yoking variation to relevance. Unlike in a market economy, where prices are directly
relevant to the interests of the buyers and sellers, the induced variation within an organization is
only indirectly relevant to its participants. So although each participant potentially has
privileged information that could benefit the organization, only some participants can be trusted to
act according to organizational relevance.

This restriction has to do with two properties between the relationship of organizations and their
participants. First, every participant cannot be assumed to have the skills, time, or knowledge
necessary to know all the factors that may affect the organization. Only through understanding the
full breadth of an organization can one attempt to determine relevance. This is why organizations
are organizations in the first place and not individuals. Organizations *differentiate* roles in
order to manage complexity within the functions that enable their existence.

Second, even if every participant has an accurate model of what is and is not relevant to the
organization, acting according to organizational relevance may not be in the participant's
interest. For example, if an office worker knows that their job could be done cheaper and better by
replacing their responsibilities with a machine, it is not in their best interest to percolate that
information into the company. In this way, organizations and the personnel that constitute them are
subject to the [*Principal-agent
problem*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principal%E2%80%93agent_problem), where there is a conflict
of interest when the organization's personnel (the agents) act on behalf of another entity (the
organization).

At Buildonomy we believe there is a way to surmount these obstacles. We believe that it is in an
organization's best interest to radically distribute autonomy and control within their
boundaries. We believe our system can simultaneously increase an organization's creativity and
efficiency while simultaneously endowing participants with a stronger commitment to the
organization's mission. We believe that adopting our system will result in an organization that is
cheaper to run, more aware of available sources value, and more flexible to changing environments.

## What is Relevance?

For information to be relevant implies it must have a direct impact on *beliefs*. An organization,
just as with any cognitive organism, has beliefs about what it is and what it desires to be. Beliefs
can be cleanly divided into *being-beliefs* and *becoming-beliefs*. Organizations use various formal
and informal models to transform information into updated beliefs. A company may use revenue and
profit information to determine if they are healthy. The same company may look at their competitors
numbers to determine where they are located amongst their peers. These are being-beliefs in that
they use available data to populate a model of where the organization is located in some state
space. They are "beliefs" in that such state spaces are impossible to comprehensively and
continuously map reality, and the gaps must be filled in with modeled assumptions in order to
transform the information into a format that the organization can operate on to make
decisions. Being-beliefs are how an organization takes stock, how it determines what resources and
what *affordances* it has available to act.^[By affordances we refer to how the organization
conceptualizes its ability to act and perceive itself and the environment it is embedded
in. Affordances are inherently symbolic, for they reduce a potentially infinite variety of signals
into a finite set of possibilities.] They do not have any perspective on what actions should be
performed. They are beliefs about what IS, not what OUGHT to be.

The distinction between [*is versus ought*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Is%E2%80%93ought_problem)
statements was introduced by the philosopher David Hume, who noticed that there is no coherent way
to transition statements about *what is* into statements about what *ought to be*. In the past few
decades, this separation has broken down, as philosophers, cognitive scientists, and biologists have
started to understand what it means to exist as a living system. To be a living system is to act
within an embedding environment in order to maintain a self-referential identity.^[An identity is
self-referential in that the constituent matter within the identity may be changing at any moment,
but the identity in the present moment is based on a smooth path from the past conception of
identity.] In this framing, what an entity ought to do is directly related to an entity's belief of
what and where it is. We refer to this phenomena as the *autopoietic imperative*.

Becoming-beliefs characterize an organization's aspirations and are foundational to the
organization's identity. They create the pull and drive that retain personnel and keep the
organization acting in the world. For example, if an organization commits to growing, this is a
becoming-belief, and as long as the belief is held it can never be satiated. Alternatively, becoming
beliefs can have finite lifetimes. Setting quarterly revenue, or headcount growth targets are
examples of finite becoming-beliefs. Organizations can have even shorter horizons on their
becoming-beliefs. A factory may set quotas for how many gizmo's they should produce in a given
day. This is a becoming belief, even if the factory has not changed their quotas in
decades. Becoming-beliefs are beliefs the organization holds on what the organization's role in the
would ought to be. Becoming beliefs embody an organization's intentions for action.

Beliefs are relevant insofar as they help to propagate the organization's identity through time and
space. An organization is more akin to a wave than a rock. Its identity isn't characterized by its
constituent matter, but by a particular dynamic pattern that persists over time. An organization's
identity is isomorphic with its beliefs. Employees, volunteers, and the general public associate the
organization with a certain mission. This mission forms the core of the organization's identity. The
organizations identity at any moment in time is based off how it acts, which is a property of its
current beliefs.

Being-beliefs propagate to and from becoming beliefs through the autopoietic
imperative. Becoming-beliefs naturally have a hierarchical structure based on their spatial-temporal
scale. For example in the case of a public company, quarterly targets are in service to larger
scaled beliefs on what the organization's purpose is. The more fine-grained becoming-beliefs are
much more likely to change in the face of new being-beliefs. Continuing the example, the next
quarter's targets are much more likely to change based of the current quarter's results than for the
company's entire mission to be re-evaluated based off one bad quarter. Yet this structure is not
symmetric, as being-beliefs are predicated on the organization's information structure and the
accompanying affordances endowed by that structure. In this manner, being-beliefs are most affected
by either the organization's large scale becoming-beliefs or by information propagated from the
external environment. In our example, this means that the metrics tracked by the company are more
strongly affected by the charter of the company than by the last quarter's results.

As an organization isn't characterized by its constituent matter, but by the way it reorganizes
matter and information, organizational relevance is the property of actions to impact the dynamic
pattern that constitutes the organization's identity. What is relevant must *resonate*. Resonance is
the characteristic of particular interventions to propagate beyond their immediate vicinity and
change the characteristics of adjacent entities and even beyond.^[Note that resonance as defined
here is largely synonymous with meaning.] Resonance can be constructive or destructive. A company
might find relevance when their product goes viral -- when customers bring in more customers of
their own volition. In this case the idea of the product resonates across the cultural landscape
without the company expending energy outside of their initial actions. Alternatively a company might
find a different type of resonance when their product is sticky. In such a case when customers adopt
the product it creates an internal flywheel effect -- the more the customer uses it, the more useful
it becomes for them. The more useful it becomes, the less desirable alternative offerings are, even
if the alternative products on their face-value would have had more compelling features or price
points if the customer were evaluating both products for the first time.

Information can be relevant due to destructive resonance. If interest rates change outside of
initial investment expectations, this may interfere with financing company growth, or customer
adoption, and such information will then cascade throughout the organization, changing
organizational being and becoming-beliefs such as headcount and revenue.

Informational relevance is characterized by its resonance -- how strongly and how widely its
consequences propagate through an organization's belief structure. Such information enters the
organization from an external source, and propagates from that point through the organization's
informational structure. By tuning into resonant signals earlier, organizations can better harness
their power by enabling positive resonance signals and dampening destructive resonance. By
increasing awareness on the resonance properties of information, an organization achieves *relevance
realization* -- the property of refining its attention and action based on what is and isn't
resonant to its identity at any one place or time.

By endowing a broader set of an organization's participants with an accurate understanding of
organizational beliefs, the collective consciousness of the organization can increase
dramatically. Each participant changes from a mere mechanism within the organizational machine into
a unique source of relevance realization. Because each participant's personality and role is
structurally and functionally unique, each participant has the potential to be attuned to a set of
unique relevant insights that are invisible or dampened within other participant's awareness. Yet
only when there is a shared model of what is and is not relevant to the organization is it
worthwhile to spread each participant's signal. Without a shared belief structure to act as a
filter, including all the voices within the organization would result in a cacophony, drowning out
all meaningful communication, and sending the organization into an epileptic fit.


### A Legible Model of Beliefs



All of this is offered through the protocol of a procedure. Procedures organize tasks into their
expected inputs, expected outputs, and the assembly roles, steps and checks that are expected to
transform the former into the latter. Unlike code, procedures offer a building block that can
scaffold creative as well as automatic work upon. Within a procedure, the actor is presumed to have
autonomy. They have the authority and responsibility to change the execution by enacting *redlines*,
or deviations from the script. It is through redlines that organizational flexibility, learning,
evolution, accountability and counterfactuals are developed. By enacting a procedure, a record of
that transaction accrues within the organizational memory. This becomes the source of priors and
beliefs that then become the shared model of organizational relevance. Procedures are not flat, they
are nested. Each one records a belief. The scale-free procedures determine the organization's
mission and they are then implemented by the roles, steps and checks that they define in their
body. It is through nesting this structure and acting within this structure that the full scale,
scope, and state of the organization's beliefs on what it is, where it is, and what it is
endeavoring to accomplish can be understood, tested, and enacted by the participants within its
confines.


Procedures

- int

## Relevance is Identity Specific

In order for cognition to be properly distributed, a shared model of organizational relevance must
be distributed and the principal agent problem must be controlled. We have characterized what
constitutes organizational relevance, but we have not touched on how an organization can confidently
entrust participants to act on behalf the organization's best interest.

The principal agent problem has two types of solutions. In one, an agent receives negative feedback
given evidence that it is leeching value from the principal, this disincentive modulates the agent's
impulse to act in its own interest at the expense of the principal. In the second type of solution,
positive feedback dominates. In such cases, the expected maximal reward for the agent is aligned
with the maximal reward for the principal such that as long as the agent acts rationally it can be
entrusted to be acting in good faith.

An example of a negative feedback solution to the principal agent problem is a public ratings
system. Agents that take advantage of their principals are rated poorly, which decreases the agent's
chances for further business opportunities. This solution is similar to [Tit for
tat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tit_for_tat) solutions to iterated versions of the [Prisonor's
dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner's_dilemma). In this reading, when a principal trusts
an agent to act on its behalf, it makes a choice to believe the agent will honor that
commitment. Given evidence to the contrary, then the principal acts to punish the agent commensurate
to the harm it caused. Such system's depend on a variety of factors to function effectively: these
assumptions include: 1) Continued play---A bad agent can exit play and make off with a one time
payoff; 2) Accurate ratings---The principals must contribute and keep accurate assessments of agents
performance, which means holding the knowledge necessary to have a counterfactual belief on what
their achieved performance would be given they entrusted responsibility to another agent; and 3) A
community of principals---Principals must perform timely evaluations and broadcast their assessments
within a community that is coordinated enough actually impact an agent's capacity to continue
operating.

Negative feedback relies on an external governing system to function. If we are to rely on negative
feedback to resolve the principal agent problem facing organizations and distributed cognition, we
must rely on systems external to the primary principal agent interaction that satisfies the
properties described above. Notably, agents must be punished or rewarded based on a counterfactual
premise---what would have been the achieved value given an alternative agent. To carry out this
assessment requires the principal to model the performance of the agent, which represents a
cognitive burden equivalent to performing the tasks of the agent in the first place. Since an
organization needs participants to exist, this entails the organization requires twice as many
participants as it would if it did not need to review an agent's performance: one to perform the
task, and one to assess the task's performance.

In the alternative class of solutions, the interests of the agent are meaningfully aligned with the
interests of the principal. When this assumption is true, the principal and agent achieve a positive
feedback relationship. If the principal and the agent have negligible divergence in their interests,
then value accrued by the principal should be commensurate with value accrued to the agent. Positive
feedback is beneficial in that it results in exponential behavior -- gains feed back into the system
which makes the system stronger which then results in further gains until another limit to growth
provides increasing negative feedback on the system's dynamics.

## Designing a Positive-Sum Solution to the Principal Agent Problem

For a positive feedback solution to resolve the Principal-Agent problem, the principal must assume
that for all actions *afforded* to the agent, then if the agent acts rationally, then will act to
maximize principal's value. Commonly, value is assumed to be uni-dimensional or that different
values are fungible with one another. In this reading, it is not safe for the principal to assume
the agent's interests are aligned with their own if the agent is afforded any control of the
principal's finances. But how does this change if we assume value is multi-dimensional and that
values can be non-fungible?

If value is multi-dimensional, even if the principal and agent have congruent values within one
dimension, so long as the remainder of their value constellations are different, then it is possible
to construct an *affordance landscape* that will maximize the agent's received value when they act
on behalf of the principal. By affordance landscape, Such a construction requires that the affordance landscape
constructively resonate within multiple dimensions of the agent's value constellation as well as the
principal's. If this constraint is met, then a rational agent will work to maximize the aggregate
value available to them within the prescribed affordance landscape, and avoid deceiving the
principal for personal payoff at the expense of the principal, even in the absence of a governing
system that provides negative feedback to the agent for deceptive actions.

This works with two main assumptions: 1) the organization has the means to recognize deception after
the fact, and 2) the organization has a tit for tat strategy in place and will sever their contract
with an agent as soon as their deception is realized. With these assumptions in place, then for the
agent to rationally engage in deception entails the agent must believe that an available one-time
payoff outweighs a lifetime of benefits provided by access to the organization's affordance
landscape.

If the dimensions of value offered are not easily fungible with one another, the
likelihood of this calculation being worthwhile decreases, as the agent will then be in a sense
starving their identity. This calculation increasingly favors access to the proffered affordance
landscape based on the non-fungibility of values in play. Therefore, the more dimensions of
non-fungible value available to the agent within the affordance landscape, the less likely it
becomes for the agent to deceive the principal.

If value is identity-specific, How can we determine what values are in play and how fungible they
are? The fungibility of an entity is proportional to the relevance of that entity when extracted
from its initial context. Money, as the ultimate token of fungible value, holds the same type and
quality of value anywhere within the society that holds that particular type of money as
currency. Maslow's hierarchy of needs provides an effective guide for finding the opposite pole of
the fungibility of value. The order of values within this hierarchy proceed from most fungible to
least fungible as follows:

0. Physiological needs
1. Safety needs
2. Love and belonging
3. Esteem
4. Self-Actualization

Physiological needs, or the needs of the body, can be met through fungible sources of value. Food,
water, shelter, temperature --- all of these qualities can be foraged without any change in
relevance based on the particular type or relations these entities possess with the wider system. As
we go higher and higher on the network, the relationship with a particular identity grows stronger
and stronger such that self-actualization---the pinnacle of the hierarchy of needs---is inseparable
from the path-dependent, context-sensitive sense of identity of each particular system. The value of
self-actualization has no extrinsic value. It is paradoxically the most and least valuable property,
for to be a thing requires an intrinsic belief of what one is, but if one is not that thing,
another's sense of identity has no functional relevance.


Constraints necessary to afford a positive-sum solution to the  Principal-Agent Problem:

1. The responsibility an agent holds over the principal's essential stocks must be proportional to
   the degree of non-fungible value the principal affords to the agent.
2. Agent must be expelled from its non-fungible relationships on discovery of deception

Note that none of these constraints require inter-organizational collaboration in order to
discourage defection. The strategy relies on the balanced asymmetry between an organization as
principal and a participant as agent. For the organization, participants are fungible, whereas the
information they process is not. For the participant, organizations in general are fungible, but the
particular affordance landscape of an organization is not. The value imparted by an agent to an
organization is defined by the _structure_ of the affordance landscape as well as _flow_ of fungible
value imparted. For a participant, the organization provides relationships, and a certain flow of
fungible value (usually a salary). For an organization, the participant provides relevance
realization, and performs the functions that result in flows of fungible value. To perform their
functions, certain participants require control over portions of the organizations stocks of
fungible value. Access to these stocks is where the potential for the principal agent problem to be
realized. If those stocks are valuable to the agent, then they can direct the flow of these stocks
for their own benefit instead of the organization's. Since an organization does not have symmetrical
control over any of the participant's stocks, an organization has to resort to different means to
punish a deceptive participant without involving a third party.

As previously mentioned, an organization does have control over two sources of value for an agent:
1) flow of fungible value, and 2) access to relationships that act as sources of non-fungible
value. This puts organizations in a partially fungible relation for their participants. They can
find other flows of fungible value, but they cannot replace the unique relationships---the
affordance landscape---the organization potentiates. It is only through control of this landscape
that an organization can ensure an agent's incentive for a one time reward through deceiving the
organization will not be worthwhile. Therefore, in order to ensure an organization's participants
act according to organizational relevance, an organization must actively design their structure to
afford the most potential for self-actualization of their participants.

Here we have a problem. There are plenty of organizations that are useful for society who's value
proposition is not well aligned with their participants desires for esteem or
self-actualization. Society needs porta-potties, but being the best porta-potty provider is not
going to provide esteem or self-actualization to enough members of society for their to be an inner
alignment of values between the organization and the participants based solely on this
organization's mission.

Also, as soon as an organization becomes sufficiently complex, task differentiation is bound to
dominate such that even the most inspiring of missions is embodied by sub-specialties with boring,
overly abstract and potentially monotonous responsibilities. Take for example, jobs such as payment
processing, or packaging quality control, or janitorial staff. Any of these specializations may be
vital functions within an inspiring organization such as a biotech firm curing cancer, a national
defense department, or a film studio. Yet, if one is working within that role it is completely
plausible that the day to day responsibilities are so isolated from the broader mission that the
whole role starts to feel worthless.

A potential solution to all these problems -- positive sum principal agent relations, boring
organizations, and boring responsibilities -- can be found through a core mechanism of Buildonomy's
information economy. This is discussed below.


## Differentiation



- Enables activation of multiple identities for an agent via matrixed identity: I am a member of the
  global systems engineer community and I am a member of buildonomy. The received value from either
  is non-fungible with one another, and if I deceive either community I lose access to both. Because
  I receive value from both, I optimize my payoff when I act in alignment with to the values of both
  identities. Therefore I channelize my identity into the intersection of both identities, which
  optimizes my value according to both identities. The more identities I can intersect into the same
  affordance landscape, the less and less rational it is for me to deceive any single one of them.

  - Skill community provides the templates, knowledge, and specialist brain that can assess how out
    of distribution my behavior is with the specialist community in aggregate.
  - Organization community provides access to monetary value by executing my skill in accordance
    with the organization's belief constellation.


It turns out that capturing the beliefs of the organization in a manner that is legible to all
participants offers the possibility of enacting such a system. In this case, the belief structure of
the organization operates as its own counterfactual engine. An agent's action towards relevance
realization is weighed against what the organization has experienced before. What Buildonomy offers
is a means for organizations to communicate and act in a manner that affords:

1. non-fungible alignment in organizational versus participants rewards
2. A sticky value hypothesis: the more an organization uses Buildonomy, the more value it accrues
3. A universal protocol for coordinating tasks, learning, changes, production, intentions, goals,
   and roles.
4. A counterfactual engine, capable of predicting the organizational relevance of variations in
   external environment, organizational structure, and organizational beliefs.

All of this is offered through the Atomic of a Buildonomy procedure. Procedures organize tasks into
their expected inputs, expected outputs, and the assembly roles, steps and checks that are
expected to transform the former into the latter. Unlike code, procedures offer a building block
that can scaffold creative as well as automatic work upon. Within a procedure, the actor is presumed
to have autonomy. They have the authority and responsibility to change the execution by enacting
*redlines*, or deviations from the script. It is through redlines that organizational flexibility,
learning, evolution, accountability and counterfactuals are developed. By enacting a procedure, a
record of that transaction accrues within the organizational memory. This becomes the source of
priors and beliefs that then become the shared model of organizational relevance. Procedures are not
flat, they are nested. Each one records a belief. The scale-free procedures determine the
organization's mission and they are then implemented by the roles, steps and checks that they define
in their body. It is through nesting this structure and acting within this structure that the full
scale, scope, and state of the organization's beliefs on what it is, where it is, and what it is
endeavoring to accomplish can be understood, tested, and enacted by the participants within its
confines.

By tying participants actions into the structure of this cognitive, procedural engine, and not to
direct control of the organization's finances and other stocks, performance can be weighed and
evaluated based on the impact the participants had on the health of the organization. The accrual of
procedural logs creates a vast trove of relevant information upon which to derive counterfactual
narratives on what performance could look like without the involvement of the participant and
thereby tie compensation to a full picture of both the creativity and efficiency enabled by each
individual.

Buildonomy enables increased autonomy and accountability to participants within an organization by
providing the following high level capabilities.

* Reducing the difficulty that any agent in a collective organization faces when trying to
  understand the organization's intentions and how they relate to the actions they are requested to
  perform. Buildonomy provids participants with a dynamic map of their organization's beliefs,
  intention, and relevance.

* Reducing the difficulty any agent in a collective organization faces when trying to demonstrate a
  new way of doing an action, in describing and comparing their new approach to what is currently
  available in terms that demonstrate the relevance of the change.

* Reducing the difficulty any agent in a collective organization faces when demonstrating or
  describing a novel task such that the collective organization understands the task's relevance to
  the organization.

* The difficulty any agent in an organization faces when transforming creative and manual actions
  into routine and automatic actions.
