# Buildonomy Core Hypotheses

*How to enable organizational relevance realization and tip the scales in favor of positive-sum
growth*

## The Argument in Three Parts

The following hypotheses define the core beliefs on which Buildonomy is built. Each belief takes the
form of a hypothesis. It is unclear if Buildonomy offers sufficient value to become a mission-driven
company if any of these beliefs are refuted, but the best way to find out is to test these
hypotheses early and often. This will occur even before there's a minimum viable product (MVP)
available. Initial validation efforts will include 1) directing communities to a landing page to
start collecting an email list, and 2) finding potential customers and [strategically interviewing
them](https://longform.asmartbear.com/customer-development/). Only once those activities are
exhausted will work proceed on an MVP (actually an [SLC](https://longform.asmartbear.com/slc/)).

We start this document at the conclusion, the Buildonomy value and growth hypotheses, in order to be
respectful of the reader's time.

### Value Hypotheses

Buildonomy is based on two complementary value hypotheses relating how organizations and the
participants which constitute them interact. The first hypothesis relates to how participants could
better perceive how the organization thinks and acts. The second hypothesis relates to how
organizations can better perceive and reward participant's contributions.

#### Networked procedures represent the best type of organizational management system

Organizations, as with all systems that try to stay alive, must dynamically optimize variability. On
one hand, they must consistently execute on what they know. On the other hand, they must learn and
adapt in order to survive within our dynamic cultural environment.

As described in [Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network][] below, to have an identity entails
believing certain things are true about the world and then acting according to those beliefs in
order to preserve the identity. As described in the [Procedures Make Beliefs Actionable and
Understandable][] hypothesis below, procedures are the most adaptable format for making a
belief-network both legible and actionable. This makes them the perfect format for managing
organizational information, and therefore perfect for managing organizational variability. By
transforming and translating implicit practices and internal coordination mechanisms into
procedures, an organization adopts a protocol that efficiently manages:

1. queuing and allocating work,
1. training personnel,
1. predicting future performance,
1. safely and quickly evolving the organization,
1. removing irrelevant information within the network, and
1. non-disruptively integrating automation into existing workflows such that manual steps can
   seamlessly transition into computer assisted automatically executed tasks.

By networking procedures, joining them into a hierarchy of dependencies, the intentions and purpose
of each procedure can be linked from finest-grained details of each operation up to the most
abstract intentions of the organization. As procedures are inherently executable and interpretable,
the same document serves as the execution logic and training library for the organization.

As procedures are executed again and again, the organization's belief network develops a
probabilistic memory of past performance that is useful for future execution. By aggregating results
among similar-in-kind results within the belief-network, Bayesian models of prior performance
reduces uncertainty on execution parameters pertinent to current or future actions. Indeed, this
organizational "Bayesian-brain" of the belief-network can be used to perform counterfactual
analyses, either by postulting a desired outcome and finding pathways through the network that might
support that outcome, or by postulating a set of actions and ranking the options based on their the
relative uncertainty, desirability, or other metrics.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network][], [Organizations are belief-networks][],
    [Organizational belief-networks are opaque][], [Procedures Make Beliefs Actionable and Understandable][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   [What is Relevance?][], [Procedures Are Inter-Subjective][]


#### Networked procedures can fairly determine the risk and value of contributions

As described in [The Meaning of Value][] hypothesis below, participants can affect fungible or
non-fungible organizational value. Their impact can be positive, negative, or a mix. For many
reasons, it is difficult for organizations to fairly assess the net contributions of their
participants. Existing organizational models are effective when estimating contributions that affect
fungible value but poor at determining the value of non-fungible contributions. A participant's
non-fungible value to an organization is based on the changes they impart on the organizational
identity. An organization can incentivize participants to positively impact the belief-network that
constitutes the organizational identity through:

1. Fairly measuring the value of changes imparted on the belief-network.
1. Maximizing the type and quantity of value received by a participant from work attributable to
   them.
1. Embedding participants in relationships that potentiate their ability to engage with new ideas,
   and compound their received social value for their attributable work.

Supporting beliefs
:   [The Meaning of Value][]

Supporting evidence:
:   TBD

Exposition
:   [The Principal Agent Problem][], [What is Relevance?][]


### Growth Hypotheses

The intersection of procedures, non-fungible value attribution, and probabilistic learning
represents a fundamentally more efficient, dynamic, and creative organizational management system
than any available alternative. As such, Buildonomy represents a sticky, viral, and value positive
growth strategy. Sticky growth is when an adopter has large barriers to switching to another product
after they start using the product. Viral growth is when adopters recruit enough of their peers that
adoption increases exponentially. Value growth is when the cost of bringing in an adopter is less
than the lifetime value accrued from that adopter.

Buildonomy offers a similar value proposition to WordPress. As with WordPress, Buildonomy's core
software is open source. This is a useful assurance for organizations leery of becoming trapped into
a closed source, unproven tool. Also similar to WordPress, Buildonomy invites the growth of an
ecosystem of third party extensions and support services who can customize and serve the core
functions to meet the needs of all the beliefs and needs of system adopters. Unlike WordPress, where
site builders do not have much of an incentive to bring their peers into the network, Buildonomy
does have that incentive, because Buildonomy belief-networks grow in usefulness the more they are
used, and the more information and updates they accrue. Therefore Buildonomy can also support an
advertisement-monetized offering. A free offering offers a compelling tool for small organizations
such as clubs, families, etc. to grow their identity and coordinate their actions within a community
of Buildonomy hosts. Such a platform is compelling for advertisers as well, as each community is
defined by its shared interests, these shared interests provide a natural means of targeting
interested and motivated customers in precise market segments and therefore ad placement will have a
higher potential click-through rate than more general community sites.


#### Sticky Growth Hypothesis

It is sticky in that once organization adopts Buildonomy, they quickly see how procedures and the
Bayesian brain accelerate their business and skill acquisition. Both these features enable better
execution predictability. How uncertain are we this task will be accomplished successfully? How long
will it likely take? What factors are most likely to cause it to fail? What parts of the task are we
least confident in? Do we have any drop in replacements for those? Answering these questions, or
even finding the correct questions to ask about an organization's tasks is difficult. But once
procedures are adopted, finding the correct questions to ask and finding their answers becomes much
easier. The more the system is used, the less uncertainty the belief-network will contain and the
organization can start to act more confidently. This is how Buildonomy accrues value through
use. Because Buildonomy accrues value through use, adopters become less and less likely to stop
using it the longer they stick to the system.

Supporting beliefs
:  TBD

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


#### Viral Growth Hypothesis

It is viral in that once a practitioner adopts the system, they are incentivized to spread it across
their network in order to accrue additional value. Buildonomy belief-networks grow in usefulness the
more they are used, and the more information and updates they accrue, users are incentivized to
bring their peers into their belief-networks. Users gain benefits by growing their belief-network
through: 1) peer accreditation for their work --- both for executing and for generating useful
procedures, 2) increasing adaptability of the procedures within the network as others use and
redline them, 3) increasing confidence in the results of executing each procedure as execution runs
turn into a probabilistic model of expected outcomes for each procedure, 4) increased belonging as
the belief-network provides the participants with a sense of collective identity.

Supporting beliefs
:   TBD

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


#### Value Growth Hypothesis

A free offering offers a compelling tool for small organizations such as clubs, families, etc. to
grow their identity and coordinate their actions within a community of Buildonomy hosts. Such a
platform is compelling for advertisers as well, as each community is defined by its shared
interests, these shared interests provide a natural means of targeting interested and motivated
customers in precise market segments and therefore ad placement will have a higher potential
click-through rate than more general community sites.


By offering free Buildonomy workspaces and selling advertising within them, Buildonomy pays for
hosting and other maintenance costs and offers advertisers access to consumers targeted based on the
procedure step-types utilized, procedure states, and text analysis.

Supporting beliefs
:   TBD

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


### Ontological Hypotheses

#### Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network

To identify as something entails that something must persist through time long enough for the
identity to be comprehensible. For an identity to be comprehensible entails believing certain things
are true about the relationship of that identity to the rest of the world. What its boundaries are,
how it acts, where it's located, etc. all entail beliefs about that entity as an identifiable thing
in the world. To have a self-identity means acting according to an identity. To act any different
would be to identify differently. Having self-identity is different than perceiving an entity and
giving it identity. In this latter case beliefs about the entity can be proven wrong based on how
the entity acts versus what one's prior beliefs were about the identity. With a self-identity, those
same beliefs inform how one acts in the first place, so to hold the beliefs is isomorphic with
holding the identity. One can still be surprised when the world challenges one's beliefs. It is
still possible to change one's beliefs and act differently in the world, but this will have a
corresponding transformation on the identity. Therefore, identity is equivalent to holding a certain
structured set of beliefs. Beliefs-as-identity form a directed acyclic graph. The structure of the
graph corresponds to the scale, location, and applicability of the embedded beliefs.

Note that a self can hold multiple identities, and therefore a belief-network may be composed of the
union of those identities. When an individual adopts multiple identities, it is not clear what the
relative ordering of all the separate beliefs are, often even for the individual themselves until
they are situated in a particular moment in which they must act.

In addition, note that when individuals identify with something external to them they must go
through a process of belief internalization. Therefore their identity is internalized from something
external. This way, two separate individuals can both identify with the same nominal symbol, say as
Catholics, but internally believe different things are true about that symbol and therefore act
differently.

Both these factors confound the separation of identities into belief-networks in real-world
situations, because most of us hold a collection of identities and many of those identities are
based on adopting externally defined identities. Nevertheless, the property is hypothesized to hold,
and organizations are a perfect medium for demonstrating its truth, especially if the organization
adopts a legible belief-network as its means of coordinating action and internal communication.

The following properties are defined for a belief-network as identity:

1. The innermost beliefs form the core of an identity and are scale-free in nature. Scale-free
   beliefs are active so long as the identity exists.

1. The outermost beliefs form the interface with the external environment and form the atomic
   patterns that characterize the symbolism of the belief-network. Only a subset of this outer layer
   is active at any one time depending on the attention state of the interior network as well as the
   sensory state of the external environment.

1. Attention is a property of beliefs to have internal state. To have internal state denotes whether
   one is acting on a belief, or simply holding it. When one is acting on a belief, then it may
   trigger a chain of dependent sub-beliefs to be acted upon that can take the generalized higher
   order belief and translate it better into the immediate context. Therefore, a dependent belief
   will be active or inactive based on whether a higher order belief contains it within its
   attention state.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Active Inference](https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262045353/active-inference/)

Supporting evidence
:   Jungian Psychology follows this pretty closely and also adds the 'unconscious' self into the
    mix. A value proposition for start ups is that if they adopt Buildonomy as their organizational
    scaffolding protocol, they avoid separation of their organizational ego from their
    organizational true self.

Exposition
:   [The Variability Dilemma][]


#### Beliefs Form a Spectrum Between Two Poles: Being-Beliefs and Becoming-Beliefs.

This distinction characterizes the purpose of a belief based on its relevance. Does the belief help
to model where the identity is currently located, or does it help to model where the identity should
be located to better maintain its identity. Beliefs consolidate the infinite possible variety of
choices or inputs into a finite set of symbolic possibilities.

1. Being-beliefs translate non-symbolic information streams into representations of what and where
   the identity is within symbolic state space.

1. Becoming-beliefs represent desired trajectories, attractors, and other action-potentiating forces
   that guide an identity's transformation within symbolic state space.

1. Most beliefs, due to their complexity, fall onto a spectrum who's limits are pure being and pure
   becoming beliefs.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


#### The Autopoietic Imperative

For an entity to be alive, it must continually work at increasing its fittedness. It must work to
update its beliefs in order to try to fit itself to the world even as it tries to fit the world to
itself. This is the autopoietic imperative and is a scale-free becoming-belief. Holding this belief
enables self-preserving behavior to manifest, thereby enabling being-beliefs to transform into
becoming-beliefs and vice versa.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


#### Relevance

Relevance characterizes the impact of a finite string of information as it passes through a
belief-network.

 1. The relevance of a chunk of information is characterized by its resonance within the belief
    structure. Highly relevant information will have non-localized effects. It will update beliefs
    deeply and/or widely through the network.

1. Relevance is positive or negative depending on whether it decreases or increases the space
   between active being and becoming beliefs.

1. Relevance Realization is the process of updating beliefs to increase the potential resonance of
   positively valenced information and decrease the potential resonance of negatively valenced
   information.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   [What is Relevance?][]


#### Organizations Are Belief-Networks

The information and actions within an organization can be fully characterized using a
belief-network. In addition, organizations typically act to preserve their identity and therefore
apply the autopoietic imperative.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Identity is Isomorphic with a Belief-Network][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


#### Organizational Belief-Networks Are Opaque

Organizational belief-networks are opaque and rarely well-understood by any of the organization's
participants. Therefore updating beliefs is a risky process, particularly for large and complex
organizations. Therefore, only a small team of experts act as gatekeepers to changing the
organization, and/or organizational change is a long-complex bureaucratic process.

Supporting beliefs
:   Experience in industry, experience with complex projects

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   TBD


#### Participants Each Have Unique Access to Insights Relevant to the Organization

Since each participant within an organization has a unique perspective, every participant has access
to unique insights on organizational relevance. If this collective relevance realization capacity
could be harnessed, organizations could be more creative, nimble, and efficient. Collective
relevance realization can be safely harnessed to organizational fittedness if the following
properties hold:

1. An organization's beliefs are legible to its participants such that they can model the resonance
   of any hypothesized event within the belief-network of the organization.
1. A satisfactory resolution of the principal-agent problem can align the incentives of each
   participant within the organization to the organization's best interest.

Supporting beliefs
:   TBD

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   [The Principal Agent Problem][]


#### Procedures Make Beliefs Actionable and Understandable

A procedure, for example a recipe for making a sandwich, maps to the core properties of a
becoming-belief. It starts with a statement of where and when the belief could apply -- only when
the prerequisite state is available. In the case of a recipe, the recipe only applies if the chef,
the kitchen, and the recipe ingredients are present. A procedure also identifies when the belief
should apply -- when the procedural outcome resonates within the belief-network. Having a sandwich
might resonate with the chef if they were hungry or if they needed money and could sell it. Indeed,
the sandwich itself may be an intermediate outcome that represents only one component of a larger
process. Maybe the sandwich forms part of an entree that also includes sides and a beverage. A
procedure represents another essential piece of information, a description of the transformation
process. In the case of a sandwich, this is a simple sequence of steps that transform the
ingredients into the sandwich using the chef's skills and available kitchen tools.

What happens if the chef finds that they are missing ingredients, but they have suitable
alternatives? They may choose to "redline" the recipe, replacing one item for another. Alternatively
if an essential kitchen tool is missing, for example a bread knife, they might choose to use an
alternative tool instead. Indeed, the chef may be a mistake, in which case they could either attempt
to salvage what they have made or discard it and start again. In all of these cases, the recipe is
forgiving, it assumes that the chef is capable of making an informed decision based off their
current context. This is in contrast to code, where the execution logic precludes any option other
than what is exactly described. As such, procedures better describe beliefs, which are contextual
and always subject to revision.

A procedure is defined by the following properties:

1. Prerequisite state: The collection of consumables, agents, and infrastructure required.

   1. Running a procedure requires each step to be overseen by agent(s) capable of interpreting AND
      changing the procedure based on contextual relevance.

1. Goal state: A description, or type-signature, of the intended transformation
1. Intermediate protocol. A state machine that describes a set of operational transformations
   sufficient to transform the prerequisite state into the goal state. In traditional paper
   procedures, each step of the protocol is composed of instructions and possibly the roles of the
   agent's authorized to perform the step. With digital procedures, steps can become arbitrarily
   more complex so long as they honor the transition criteria defined by their embedding
   procedure. In this manner, specialized step types can be generated and a whole ecosystem of
   available plugins can provide contextually relevant automation that decreases or outright removes
   the manually driven tasks within a procedure.

Supporting beliefs
:   Ex nihilo

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   [Procedures Are Inter-Subjective][]


##### AsRun Log

The agent(s) executing a procedure must be capable of communicating their changes through an As-Run
log, The purpose of this artifact is to record the results of each intermediate step in sequential
order, as well as any *redlines* introduced during the process. A redline is a material change to
the meaning of any part of the procedure's contents.

Data within an AsRun Log includes but is not limited to:

1. The Procedure ID and procedure version ID of the procedure the log instantiates
1. Operational State: The current execution state within the mapped procedure that the AsRun Log
   is recording.
1. Log of steps performed, who and what performed them, what if any redlines were introduced, what
   inputs were used and what outputs were produced as well as any custom logs defined by the step
   itself.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Procedures Make Beliefs Actionable and Understandable][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   See supporting beliefs


##### Bayesian Model

The transformation operations of a procedure define a state-machine that describes how the intended
result may be accomplished from the input state. AsRun logs accrue the results of passing through
this state machine as an organization acts on the procedural belief again and again. When these logs
are properly processed, they can generate useful probabilistic models of what the likely outcomes of
running the procedure will be. As these models are integrated with one another through the
belief-network, an organization can start to simulate counterfactuals, which provides the capability
to automatically reason about the relative desirability of a set of possiblilities open to the
organization.

These Bayesian models are connected both through the explicit interconnections within the
organizational belief-network as well as through grouping similar-in-kind execution steps. Since
each intermediate step within a procedure contains a record of who performed the operation, what the
inputs were, what the step type was, and what the outputs were, each step type itself generates a
useful probabilistic model of its possible outcomes.

Using the recipe example from above, the chef is using a similar Bayesian model whenever they
develop a feeling for how likely they are to achieve a valuable result from executing the procedure
within their immediate context. They may be able to predict whether the recipe will translate well
from a commercial kitchen to a home kitchen. They may be able to predict whether a certain
substitution or cooking method will be successful or not. The confidence they have in these
out-of-family predictions is highly correlated with their level and type of prior experience.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Procedures Make Beliefs Actionable and Understandable][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   See supporting beliefs


##### Procedures Versus Programs

The relationship of procedure, executing agent, and AsRun log illustrates the difference between a
procedure and a program. In a program, the executor only needs to follow commands, is not provided
any authority to change the commands, and therefore has no presumed capacity to recognize contextual
relevance. In addition, in a program's execution, the executor assumes no responsibility to record
the sequence followed unless explicitly commanded to do so. By not generating AsRun logs, no
Bayesian model can be generated to help inform future performance.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Procedures Make Beliefs Actionable and Understandable][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   See supporting beliefs


#### The Meaning of Value

Value is defined by patterns of relevance within the belief-network. Relevant information will
resonate in predictable patterns based on how the information enters the network, how it propagates,
and how it affects the beliefs it encounters. Distinct relevance pattern types represent distinct
types of value within the belief-network. The network can likely identify these patterns and
describe them using different symbols such as money, reputation, capital, etc.

Belief-networks engage with the environment through stocks and flows of value. Stocks track accrued
value. Each stock accounts for a characteristic value-type signature and tracks entities of that
type signature that the belief-network can directly act on. A value-type may be fungible,
non-fungible, or partially-fungible.

Supporting beliefs
:   [Relevance][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   [What is Relevance?][]


##### Fungible Value

Commodities are fungible value-types. Commodities are entities that are relevant to the
belief-network because of their intrinsic properties, and not because of their present contextual
relationship with the belief-network. Currency is the prime example. A single dollar holds the same
intrinsic value for the belief-network regardless of where its located. The only determining factor
is whether it is within the belief-network's stock or not. It does not matter what order or
relationship that dollar has with any other dollar within the stock, It does not matter if the
dollar is dirty or old, the only factor that matters if the dollar is present in the
belief-network's stock or not.

Supporting beliefs
:   [The Meaning of Value][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   See supporting beliefs


##### Non-Fungible Value

Relationships are non-fungible value types. A belief-network holds stocks of relationships that
track how the identity of the network relates to other relevant identities, but the order, state,
and type of a relationship matters. The value intrinsic to a relationship is based on the
area-under-the curve of the relevance imparted by that relationship within the belief-network.

Relationships are asymmetric. One entity may relate to another in a manner completely
uncharacteristic of the inverse relationship. The value represented by a non-fungible stock
corresponds to the potential of that stock to change other stocks.

For example, an artist completes a stone sculpture. The artist now relates to the particular
configuration of that piece of stone as its efficient and formal cause. This relationship might have
itself caused the artist to be changed themselves. They may have developed new skills, or a new way
of perceiving their environment through the act of carving the sculpture. These relationships
between artist and sculpture may cause changes in relationships between the artist and the rest of
their world depending on how the sculpture is received. The artist's relationship with the sculpture
thereby endows the artist with flows of future value. The artist may accrue further relationships
with artists and collectors. The artist receives flows of fungible value as the sculpture is traded
through a collector's network.

Supporting beliefs
:   [The Meaning of Value][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   See supporting beliefs


##### Partially-Fungible Value

Partially-fungible relationships are ephemeral. Two identities form a relationship, perform a
transaction, and then dissolve the relationship. There is no intrinsic value in the historical fact
that the relationship occurred, as neither entities belief-network was materially changed by the
relationship, but both parties must place themselves in a state of mutual trust to accomplish the
transaction. Paying an accountant to perform your taxes is an example of a partially fungible
relationship.

Supporting beliefs
:   [The Meaning of Value][]

Supporting evidence
:   TBD

Exposition
:   See supporting beliefs
