[The Principal Agent Problem]: #the-principal-agent-problem
# The Principal Agent Problem

## Negative Feedback Solutions

The principal agent problem has two types of solutions. In one, an agent receives negative feedback
given evidence that it is leeching value from the principal, this disincentive modulates the agent's
impulse to act in its own interest at the expense of the principal. In the second type of solution,
positive feedback dominates. In such cases, the expected maximal reward for the agent is aligned
with the maximal reward for the principal such that as long as the agent acts rationally it can be
entrusted to be acting in good faith.

An example of a negative feedback solution to the principal agent problem is a public ratings
system. Agents that take advantage of their principals are rated poorly, which decreases the agent's
chances for further business opportunities. This solution is similar to [Tit for
tat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tit_for_tat) solutions to iterated versions of the [Prisonor's
dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner's_dilemma). In this reading, when a principal trusts
an agent to act on its behalf, it makes a choice to believe the agent will honor that
commitment. Given evidence to the contrary, then the principal acts to punish the agent commensurate
to the harm it caused. Such system's depend on a variety of factors to function effectively: these
assumptions include: 1) Continued play---A bad agent can exit play and make off with a one time
payoff; 2) Accurate ratings---The principals must contribute and keep accurate assessments of agents
performance, which means holding the knowledge necessary to have a counterfactual belief on what
their achieved performance would be given they entrusted responsibility to another agent; and 3) A
community of principals---Principals must perform timely evaluations and broadcast their assessments
within a community that is coordinated enough actually impact an agent's capacity to continue
operating.

Negative feedback relies on an external governing system to function. If we are to rely on negative
feedback to resolve the principal agent problem facing organizations and distributed cognition, we
must rely on systems external to the primary principal agent interaction that satisfies the
properties described above. Notably, agents must be punished or rewarded based on a counterfactual
premise---what would have been the achieved value given an alternative agent. To carry out this
assessment requires the principal to model the performance of the agent, which represents a
cognitive burden equivalent to performing the tasks of the agent in the first place. Since an
organization needs participants to exist, this entails the organization requires twice as many
participants as it would if it did not need to review an agent's performance: one to perform the
task, and one to assess the task's performance.

In the alternative class of solutions, the interests of the agent are meaningfully aligned with the
interests of the principal. When this assumption is true, the principal and agent achieve a positive
feedback relationship. If the principal and the agent have negligible divergence in their interests,
then value accrued by the principal should be commensurate with value accrued to the agent. Positive
feedback is beneficial in that it results in exponential behavior -- gains feed back into the system
which makes the system stronger which then results in further gains until another limit to growth
provides increasing negative feedback on the system's dynamics.

## Positive-Feedback Solutions

For a positive feedback solution to resolve the Principal-Agent problem, the principal must assume
that for all actions *afforded* to the agent, then if the agent acts rationally, then will act to
maximize principal's value. Commonly, value is assumed to be uni-dimensional or that different
values are fungible with one another. In this reading, it is not safe for the principal to assume
the agent's interests are aligned with their own if the agent is afforded any control of the
principal's finances. But how does this change if we assume value is multi-dimensional and that
values can be non-fungible?

If value is multi-dimensional, even if the principal and agent have congruent values within one
dimension, so long as the remainder of their value constellations are different, then it is possible
to construct an *affordance landscape* that will maximize the agent's received value when they act
on behalf of the principal. By affordance landscape, Such a construction requires that the affordance landscape
constructively resonate within multiple dimensions of the agent's value constellation as well as the
principal's. If this constraint is met, then a rational agent will work to maximize the aggregate
value available to them within the prescribed affordance landscape, and avoid deceiving the
principal for personal payoff at the expense of the principal, even in the absence of a governing
system that provides negative feedback to the agent for deceptive actions.

This works with two main assumptions: 1) the organization has the means to recognize deception after
the fact, and 2) the organization has a tit for tat strategy in place and will sever their contract
with an agent as soon as their deception is realized. With these assumptions in place, then for the
agent to rationally engage in deception entails the agent must believe that an available one-time
payoff outweighs a lifetime of benefits provided by access to the organization's affordance
landscape.

If the dimensions of value offered are not easily fungible with one another, the
likelihood of this calculation being worthwhile decreases, as the agent will then be in a sense
starving their identity. This calculation increasingly favors access to the proffered affordance
landscape based on the non-fungibility of values in play. Therefore, the more dimensions of
non-fungible value available to the agent within the affordance landscape, the less likely it
becomes for the agent to deceive the principal.

If value is identity-specific, How can we determine what values are in play and how fungible they
are? The fungibility of an entity is proportional to the relevance of that entity when extracted
from its initial context. Money, as the ultimate token of fungible value, holds the same type and
quality of value anywhere within the society that holds that particular type of money as
currency. Maslow's hierarchy of needs provides an effective guide for finding the opposite pole of
the fungibility of value. The order of values within this hierarchy proceed from most fungible to
least fungible as follows:

0. Physiological needs
1. Safety needs
2. Love and belonging
3. Esteem
4. Self-Actualization

Physiological needs, or the needs of the body, can be met through fungible sources of value. Food,
water, shelter, temperature --- all of these qualities can be foraged without any change in
relevance based on the particular type or relations these entities possess with the wider system. As
we go higher and higher on the network, the relationship with a particular identity grows stronger
and stronger such that self-actualization---the pinnacle of the hierarchy of needs---is inseparable
from the path-dependent, context-sensitive sense of identity of each particular system. The value of
self-actualization has no extrinsic value. It is paradoxically the most and least valuable property,
for to be a thing requires an intrinsic belief of what one is, but if one is not that thing,
another's sense of identity has no functional relevance.

Constraints necessary to afford a positive-sum solution to the Principal-Agent Problem:

1. The responsibility an agent holds over the principal's essential stocks must be proportional to
   the degree of non-fungible value the principal affords to the agent.
2. Agent must be expelled from its non-fungible relationships on discovery of deception

Note that none of these constraints require inter-organizational collaboration in order to
discourage defection. The strategy relies on the balanced asymmetry between an organization as
principal and a participant as agent. For the organization, participants are fungible, whereas the
information they process is not. For the participant, organizations in general are fungible, but the
particular affordance landscape of an organization is not. The value imparted by an agent to an
organization is defined by the _structure_ of the affordance landscape as well as _flow_ of fungible
value imparted. For a participant, the organization provides relationships, and a certain flow of
fungible value (usually a salary). For an organization, the participant provides relevance
realization, and performs the functions that result in flows of fungible value. To perform their
functions, certain participants require control over portions of the organizations stocks of
fungible value. Access to these stocks is where the potential for the principal agent problem to be
realized. If those stocks are valuable to the agent, then they can direct the flow of these stocks
for their own benefit instead of the organization's. Since an organization does not have symmetrical
control over any of the participant's stocks, an organization has to resort to different means to
punish a deceptive participant without involving a third party.

As previously mentioned, an organization does have control over two sources of value for an agent:
1) flow of fungible value, and 2) access to relationships that act as sources of non-fungible
value. This puts organizations in a partially fungible relation for their participants. They can
find other flows of fungible value, but they cannot replace the unique relationships---the
affordance landscape---the organization potentiates. It is only through control of this landscape
that an organization can ensure an agent's incentive for a one time reward through deceiving the
organization will not be worthwhile. Therefore, in order to ensure an organization's participants
act according to organizational relevance, an organization must actively design their structure to
afford the most potential for self-actualization of their participants.

Here we have a problem. There are plenty of organizations that are useful for society who's value
proposition is not well aligned with their participants desires for esteem or
self-actualization. Society needs porta-potties, but being the best porta-potty provider is not
going to provide esteem or self-actualization to enough members of society for their to be an inner
alignment of values between the organization and the participants based solely on this
organization's mission.

Also, as soon as an organization becomes sufficiently complex, task differentiation is bound to
dominate such that even the most inspiring of missions is embodied by sub-specialties with boring,
overly abstract and potentially monotonous responsibilities. Take for example, jobs such as payment
processing, or packaging quality control, or janitorial staff. Any of these specializations may be
vital functions within an inspiring organization such as a biotech firm curing cancer, a national
defense department, or a film studio. Yet, if one is working within that role it is completely
plausible that the day to day responsibilities are so isolated from the broader mission that the
whole role starts to feel worthless.

A potential solution to all these problems -- positive sum principal agent relations, boring
organizations, and boring responsibilities -- can be found through a core mechanism of Buildonomy's
information economy:

- Provide the specialized toolboxes for automating boring parts,
- Provide proper attribution incentives for rewarding successful changes to the work structure, and
- Community clustering: Bayesian brain clusters similar agents and allows similar changes to be
  communicated and observed across teams.
