[The Variability Dilemma]: #the-variability-dilemma
# The Variability Dilemma

To survive, every organism faces a trade off between adaptability and efficiency. Organizations,
such as your company, government, or tennis club are no different. To be efficient, variability must
be constrained. Yet variability is necessary to adapt. For an organization to be successful, they
must simultaneously efficiently exploit what is currently available to them while simultaneously
exploring the *adjacent possible*^[The adjacent possible is an idea introduced by Stuart Kaufmann to
describe the set of possibilities available to exploit at any given point in time. That which is
"adjacent possible" is characterized by the possibility space of all potential combinations of what
is known into new and potentially functionally novel configurations.], the realm of potentiality by
which they may harvest new opportunities.

Organizations must be efficient and creative, yet not universally so. Efficiency and creativity must
be yoked to what is *relevant*. Traditionally organizations differentiate their internal teams to
either focus on maintaining and enhancing organizational efficiency or on creatively adapting and
evolving their organizational identity. Often, creative responsibilities are isolated within the
executive team or possibly entrusted to specialized research and development teams. Throughout the
rest of the organization, the merit of work performed is correlated with how well it conforms to
predefined expectations.

In this structure, approved organizational variation is determined by the decisions of a few central
players. This is similar to how prices are determined in a planned economy by a central department
of bureaucrats. Market driven economies are widely agreed to be more efficient, fair, and responsive
to changing circumstances than planned economies, so why are organizations consistently so
restrictive with the control of their own variability?

What if the responsibilities for internal variation were distributed more widely across an
organization? Would that not increase the organization's cognitive potential? Just as in a market
economy, each participant has access to unique information that they can feed into the aggregate
signal, information that is impossible to accrue within a centralized system because of the
fluctuating and variable nature of what is and is not relevant to any particular problem. In the
case of a market, this aggregate signal is the price of goods and services. In the case of an
organization, the signal is the amount and type of beneficial organizational variation.

What prevents an organization from acting in this more efficient manner? The difficulty lies in
properly yoking variation to relevance. Unlike in a market economy, where prices are directly
relevant to the interests of the buyers and sellers, the induced variation within an organization is
only indirectly relevant to its participants. So although each participant potentially has
privileged information that could benefit the organization, only some participants can be trusted to
act according to organizational relevance.

This restriction has to do with two properties between the relationship of organizations and their
participants. First, every participant cannot be assumed to have the skills, time, or knowledge
necessary to know all the factors that may affect the organization. Only through understanding the
full breadth of an organization can one attempt to determine relevance. This is why organizations
are organizations in the first place and not individuals. Organizations *differentiate* roles in
order to manage complexity within the functions that enable their existence.

Second, even if every participant has an accurate model of what is and is not relevant to the
organization, acting according to organizational relevance may not be in the participant's
interest. For example, if an office worker knows that their job could be done cheaper and better by
replacing their responsibilities with a machine, it is not in their best interest to percolate that
information into the company. In this way, organizations and the personnel that constitute them are
subject to the [*Principal-agent
problem*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principal%E2%80%93agent_problem), where there is a conflict
of interest when the organization's personnel (the agents) act on behalf of another entity (the
organization).

It turns out that capturing the beliefs of the organization in a manner that is legible to all
participants offers the possibility of enacting such a system. In this case, the belief structure of
the organization operates as its own counterfactual engine. An agent's action towards relevance
realization is weighed against what the organization has experienced before. What Buildonomy offers
is a means for organizations to communicate and act in a manner that affords:

1. non-fungible alignment in organizational versus participants rewards
2. A sticky value hypothesis: the more an organization uses Buildonomy, the more value it accrues
3. A universal protocol for coordinating tasks, learning, changes, production, intentions, goals,
   and roles.
4. A counterfactual engine, capable of predicting the organizational relevance of variations in
   external environment, organizational structure, and organizational beliefs.

All of this is available when an organization makes their belief-network legible by creating and
using Buildonomy procedures. Procedures organize tasks into their expected inputs, expected outputs,
and the assembly roles, steps and checks that are expected to transform the former into the
latter. Unlike code, procedures offer a building block that can scaffold creative as well as
automatic work upon. Within a procedure, the actor is presumed to have autonomy. They have the
authority and responsibility to change the execution by enacting *redlines*, or deviations from the
script. It is through redlines that organizational flexibility, learning, evolution, accountability
and counterfactuals are developed. By enacting a procedure, a record of that transaction accrues
within the organizational memory. This becomes the source of priors and beliefs that then become the
shared model of organizational relevance. Procedures are not flat, they are nested. Each one records
a belief. The scale-free procedures determine the organization's mission and they are then
implemented by the roles, steps and checks that they define in their body. It is through nesting
this structure and acting within this structure that the full scale, scope, and state of the
organization's beliefs on what it is, where it is, and what it is endeavoring to accomplish can be
understood, tested, and enacted by the participants within its confines.

By tying participants actions into the structure of this cognitive, procedural engine, and not to
direct control of the organization's finances and other stocks, performance can be weighed and
evaluated based on the impact the participants had on the health of the organization. The accrual of
procedural logs creates a vast trove of relevant information upon which to derive counterfactual
narratives on what performance could look like without the involvement of the participant and
thereby tie compensation to a full picture of both the creativity and efficiency enabled by each
individual.

Buildonomy enables increased autonomy and accountability to participants within an organization by
providing the following high level capabilities.

* Reducing the difficulty that any agent in a collective organization faces when trying to
  understand the organization's intentions and how they relate to the actions they are requested to
  perform. Buildonomy provids participants with a dynamic map of their organization's beliefs,
  intention, and relevance.

* Reducing the difficulty any agent in a collective organization faces when trying to demonstrate a
  new way of doing an action, in describing and comparing their new approach to what is currently
  available in terms that demonstrate the relevance of the change.

* Reducing the difficulty any agent in a collective organization faces when demonstrating or
  describing a novel task such that the collective organization understands the task's relevance to
  the organization.

* The difficulty any agent in an organization faces when transforming creative and manual actions
  into routine and automatic actions.

At Buildonomy we believe there is a way to surmount these obstacles. We believe that it is in an
organization's best interest to radically distribute autonomy and control within their
boundaries. We believe our system can simultaneously increase an organization's creativity and
efficiency while simultaneously endowing participants with a stronger commitment to the
organization's mission. We believe that adopting our system will result in an organization that is
cheaper to run, more aware of available sources value, and more flexible to changing environments.

# Bureaucracies are Structurally Anti Social

Bureaucracies are anti social. They develop psychosis on understanding who and what they are due to the
brittleness of their structure and inability to recursively realize relevance. Their nature is
structurally optimized for exploitation and specialization. Why? Our social coordination and
expectations naturally lead to this



## Relevance Realization, learning, differentiation

* Every asset is a liability

  * The kludginess of automation: brittle, requires bespoke mini-languages and knowing a deep stack
  * the language barriers of software: off the shelf products are trying to build a moat, so
    either support a "third party ecosystem", or just re-build every feature. Each UI is bespoke,
    and therefore to use software you have to know a mini-language. If you want to customize it
    to form to your purpose, often you are SOL either because that's not an option or you need to
    hire a team just to act as the gatekeepers to your now even-more fragile creation.
  * all capex (including software) ages, requires maintenance, goes out of date. Requires
    revisiting trade-studies to even know if each product is "correct"
  * which feeds into:

* the effort required to keep everyone on the same page. What is relevant for each differentiated
  part or role.

  * Hire people to keep people on the same page like technical writing teams or systems engineers
    and then your org structure becomes more specialized, which has an adverse effect on keeping a
    company from having the same mission, as internal specializations become more exacting and org
    structures become more stove-piped.
  * the opaqueness of documentation. Even if you are consistent about keeping documentation up to
    date, the problem of knowing what each employee should know and should read is ill defined.
  * Why can't each asset be an opportunity (enhance generalization and exploration)
  * As a piece of the company, it is easier to write more than it is to delete or remove, as
    everything produced might still have value, and its very difficult to know what is _actually_
    relevant unless one is aware of the entire state of being of the company. This means
    that the artifacts of complexity and calcification naturally accrue.

# Where art thou oh superego?

* Companies take themselves too seriously

  * No one dies if a company fails. Companies are walking around in a dark forest of their own
    imaginations. It should be much easier for company capex and intellectual assets to feed the
    ecosystem if they don't make it then is currently the case. Unfortunately the 'corpse' of a
    company is pretty illegible, it takes a lot of effort to compare what one company is doing
    against another in order to see the pro and cons between the approaches of each particular
    capability.
  * Companies are supposed to make people's lives better, not people make companies lives
    better. Too often priorities are flipped when companies value their survival too strongly.
  * What is relevant to a company's short term and long term success is not often legible. In the
    short term, a company must know the intentions its supply chain, customer base, as well as
    employees in order to have a handle on what to focus on. In the long term, a company must
    find, form, and evolve a niche in the ecosystem of human needs in order to identify threats,
    understand allies, and support synergies.

* Companies don't take themselves seriously enough

  * Most improvements in quality of life require sustained attention across a long time, as well
    as an organized collection of differentiated expertise as well as low-enough stakes in order
    to finance multiple bets in the same space. A marketplace of companies is well suited to
    solving these constraints.
  * Instead of viewing companies as a jungle ecosystem, we should view them more as a
    microbiome. Characterized by a directed flow of energy (the needs and quality of life
    improvements of persons), as well as gene swapping. Companies should not be aimed at nation
    building, but healthy _local_ ecosystem building. Instead of defaulting to expansion and
    mergers when succeeding, companies should default to fractionate.
  * Companies are largely responsible for forming the ecological niche's that we operate
    within. They are the primary ecosystem builders of the mileau within which persons exist. As
    such, they shape preferences inasmuch as they find and respond to preferences.

# Egregores

## Defining Egregores

## Perceiving Egregores

Finding egregores. How do we define the markov boundary of each egregore? Where do we find
constrained maximal entropy? What dimension's of 'optionality' is that constrained maximal entropy
keeping open? What is a substrate, where does egregore come from in its dynamics.

Egregores need a substrate. Humans are unique in their capacity to simultaneously manifest multiple
egregores. Cells scaffold into single entities, birds flock together, humans are part of families,
cities, businesses, interest groups, cultures. Each is spacio-tempoarily disjoint.

## Speaking with Egregores

Why would we give an egregore a voice? To better decide if they are a friend or foe. To learn.

What would it take? Markov blanket and a dissipation function(al)s and Active Inference Engine.

What ramifications would it have? Alignment wise: Could ensure the substrate is balanced by
introducing such entities pair wise, such that there is a stable competitive dynamic between the
system's normative orders. Society wise: would it isolate people more to communicate with these
phenomena? Would it bring people closer together?
