[What is Relevance?]: #what-is-relevance
# What is Relevance?

For information to be relevant implies it must have a direct impact on *beliefs*. An organization,
just as with any cognitive organism, has beliefs about what it is and what it desires to be. Beliefs
can be cleanly divided into *being-beliefs* and *becoming-beliefs*. Organizations use various formal
and informal models to transform information into updated beliefs. A company may use revenue and
profit information to determine if they are healthy. The same company may look at their competitors
numbers to determine where they are located amongst their peers. These are being-beliefs in that
they use available data to populate a model of where the organization is located in some state
space. They are "beliefs" in that such state spaces are impossible to comprehensively and
continuously map reality, and the gaps must be filled in with modeled assumptions in order to
transform the information into a format that the organization can operate on to make
decisions. Being-beliefs are how an organization takes stock, how it determines what resources and
what *affordances* it has available to act.^[By affordances we refer to how the organization
conceptualizes its ability to act and perceive itself and the environment it is embedded
in. Affordances are inherently symbolic, for they reduce a potentially infinite variety of signals
into a finite set of possibilities.] They do not have any perspective on what actions should be
performed. They are beliefs about what IS, not what OUGHT to be.

The distinction between [*is versus ought*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Is%E2%80%93ought_problem)
statements was introduced by the philosopher David Hume, who noticed that there is no coherent way
to transition statements about *what is* into statements about what *ought to be*. In the past few
decades, this separation has broken down, as philosophers, cognitive scientists, and biologists have
started to understand what it means to exist as a living system. To be a living system is to act
within an embedding environment in order to maintain a self-referential identity.^[An identity is
self-referential in that the constituent matter within the identity may be changing at any moment,
but the identity in the present moment is based on a smooth path from the past conception of
identity.] In this framing, what an entity ought to do is directly related to an entity's belief of
what and where it is. We refer to this phenomena as the *autopoietic imperative*.

Becoming-beliefs characterize an organization's aspirations and are foundational to the
organization's identity. They create the pull and drive that retain personnel and keep the
organization acting in the world. For example, if an organization commits to growing, this is a
becoming-belief, and as long as the belief is held it can never be satiated. Alternatively, becoming
beliefs can have finite lifetimes. Setting quarterly revenue, or headcount growth targets are
examples of finite becoming-beliefs. Organizations can have even shorter horizons on their
becoming-beliefs. A factory may set quotas for how many gizmo's they should produce in a given
day. This is a becoming belief, even if the factory has not changed their quotas in
decades. Becoming-beliefs are beliefs the organization holds on what the organization's role in the
would ought to be. Becoming beliefs embody an organization's intentions for action.

Beliefs are relevant insofar as they help to propagate the organization's identity through time and
space. An organization is more akin to a wave than a rock. Its identity isn't characterized by its
constituent matter, but by a particular dynamic pattern that persists over time. An organization's
identity is isomorphic with its beliefs. Employees, volunteers, and the general public associate the
organization with a certain mission. This mission forms the core of the organization's identity. The
organizations identity at any moment in time is based off how it acts, which is a property of its
current beliefs.

Being-beliefs propagate to and from becoming beliefs through the autopoietic
imperative. Becoming-beliefs naturally have a hierarchical structure based on their spatial-temporal
scale. For example in the case of a public company, quarterly targets are in service to larger
scaled beliefs on what the organization's purpose is. The more fine-grained becoming-beliefs are
much more likely to change in the face of new being-beliefs. Continuing the example, the next
quarter's targets are much more likely to change based of the current quarter's results than for the
company's entire mission to be re-evaluated based off one bad quarter. Yet this structure is not
symmetric, as being-beliefs are predicated on the organization's information structure and the
accompanying affordances endowed by that structure. In this manner, being-beliefs are most affected
by either the organization's large scale becoming-beliefs or by information propagated from the
external environment. In our example, this means that the metrics tracked by the company are more
strongly affected by the charter of the company than by the last quarter's results.

As an organization isn't characterized by its constituent matter, but by the way it reorganizes
matter and information, organizational relevance is the property of actions to impact the dynamic
pattern that constitutes the organization's identity. What is relevant must *resonate*. Resonance is
the characteristic of particular interventions to propagate beyond their immediate vicinity and
change the characteristics of adjacent entities and even beyond.^[Note that resonance as defined
here is largely synonymous with meaning.] Resonance can be constructive or destructive. A company
might find relevance when their product goes viral -- when customers bring in more customers of
their own volition. In this case the idea of the product resonates across the cultural landscape
without the company expending energy outside of their initial actions. Alternatively a company might
find a different type of resonance when their product is sticky. In such a case when customers adopt
the product it creates an internal flywheel effect -- the more the customer uses it, the more useful
it becomes for them. The more useful it becomes, the less desirable alternative offerings are, even
if the alternative products on their face-value would have had more compelling features or price
points if the customer were evaluating both products for the first time.

Information can be relevant due to destructive resonance. If interest rates change outside of
initial investment expectations, this may interfere with financing company growth, or customer
adoption, and such information will then cascade throughout the organization, changing
organizational being and becoming-beliefs such as headcount and revenue.

Informational relevance is characterized by its resonance -- how strongly and how widely its
consequences propagate through an organization's belief structure. Such information enters the
organization from an external source, and propagates from that point through the organization's
informational structure. By tuning into resonant signals earlier, organizations can better harness
their power by enabling positive resonance signals and dampening destructive resonance. By
increasing awareness on the resonance properties of information, an organization achieves *relevance
realization* -- the property of refining its attention and action based on what is and isn't
resonant to its identity at any one place or time.

By endowing a broader set of an organization's participants with an accurate understanding of
organizational beliefs, the collective consciousness of the organization can increase
dramatically. Each participant changes from a mere mechanism within the organizational machine into
a unique source of relevance realization. Because each participant's personality and role is
structurally and functionally unique, each participant has the potential to be attuned to a set of
unique relevant insights that are invisible or dampened within other participant's awareness. Yet
only when there is a shared model of what is and is not relevant to the organization is it
worthwhile to spread each participant's signal. Without a shared belief structure to act as a
filter, including all the voices within the organization would result in a cacophony, drowning out
all meaningful communication, and sending the organization into an epileptic fit.

TODO
:   Express value (including fungible and non-fungible), relevance, resonance as algorithmically as
    possible.
