# Meet Joe

Joe is preparing a report for his boss. Joe is working really hard on this report. He's up past
midnight trying to finish it before the deadline when in a moment of frustration he asks himself
"what am I doing this for?". What sort of answers might he (and we) find satisfying?

The answers we want to discover are actionable. Ideally, they should either increase Joe's resolve
to finish his report or allow him to stop working on it and confidently face the consequences. At
the very least, our answers should teach Joe how to either embrace or avoid similar uncomfortable
situations in the future.

What Joe really seems to be asking is "Am I playing the game, or am I getting played?". The game, of
course, is life, and it is an Infinite Game [@FIG], where the only real objective is to keep the
game going.

With Joe's help, we will explore how to work with this question in a practical manner. Our objective
is to reduce conflicts between our intentions and our actions and also create a framework for using
technology and social networks to better translate our intentions into reality. We will explore how
we can identify the actors and environments we are interacting *with*, and *within*. We will then
use that knowledge to more intentionally support those who are aligned with and change or avoid the
actors who we are in conflict with. Not only can we start to resolve our internal and external
conflicts, we can also empower ourselves to work on more demanding and rewarding activities.


## Joe's Report

It's late, Joe's tired. Joe volunteered two days ago to prepare a high priority report on a
potential acquisition target after his boss Sue informed his team about the request. The
report is going right to the top, and will be distributed to the board of directors tomorrow
at 10 AM for their meeting.

For the past two days, Joe has spent most of his waking hours working on, and thinking about the
report. It has been a slog, and Joe's motivation to complete the report, let alone continue working
at ACME, is at an all time low.

So we find our friend Joe asking himself "why am I even working on this damned thing?" while getting
himself a cup of coffee, preparing himself to pull an all nighter just to get the report in his
boss's hands before 7AM the next day. It's our job to help Joe answer this question, and in order do
so we must piece apart the threads of intention and action that lead to this moment of existential
uncertainty.

We will be operating in the realm of proximate causes. Many events had to occur in order to get Joe
to this moment of existential angst. So, let's start by acknowledging we will not find any final
causes in our search. The best we can do is examine the circumstances and intentions motivating Joe
and/or ACME which culminate with Joe, the report, and his moment of midnight existential
uncertainty. We recognize that the most actionable information is likely found closest to the event
in question, but when it seems productive, we will trace what we identify to more indirect
circumstances and actions.

Now, on with the show. Let's examine Joe's and ACME's circumstances and intentions to try and piece
together why this report was requested, why Joe is still working on it so close to the deadline, and
why Joe is so unhappy about his situation. We will extract problem statements from Joe's condition
which will later examine once we have introduced the formalism of The Animist Interface.


## Joe's Intention: Satisfy Basic Needs

Why is Joe working on the report at all? Joe is working on the report as part of his job at ACME
which means he trades his time to ACME for an income. But why should he want a job and an income in
the first place? We can come up with reasons about needing the income to keep a roof over his
family's head, eat, pay off his debts, and eventually have a nice vacation and retirement. We could
look at what we really mean by *earning* and *money* but then we would be questioning monetary and
political systems in abstract. Analyzing systems in abstract is unlikely to help Joe in his current
situation. Remember, our analysis is looking to discover actionable knowledge to directly help Joe
either increase his resolve to finish the report or to confidently quit working on the
project. Instead we end with the unavoidable conclusion that unpleasant tasks cannot always be
avoided. Although we have the lingering suspicion that there's more unpleasantness in Joe's (and
most people's) circumstance than is strictly necessary.

(@survival) (fixme) version 1: Given conflict between the actions necessary to survive and actions
    necessary to thrive, how can we tell if the conflict is avoidable or not?

    version 2: Can we determine if we've optimized how much energy and time we have available
    to thrive, given there will unavoidably be time and energy we must spend on maintaining survival?


## ACME's Intention: Increase Corporate Profits

Why does Joe's boss want this report at all? She probably has a similar keep-her-job sort of reason
as Joe, but more directly she wants the report because the company board requested a financial
analysis forecasting impacts were ACME to purchase a certain Tallahassee widget factory. But why?
once again, likely there are multiple proximate causes, maybe a board member really likes
Tallahassee. Likely the request is motivated by the pursuit of profit. Members of the board likely
believe bringing the widgets in house will make the company's gizmos easier to make and therefore
increase their profitability. But why make more profit? Even given a generous definition of profit
as extracting more value than the sum of the inputs, are they calculating value using meaningful
metrics? Once again, we're dangerously close to examining our monetary and political systems,
answers to which are unlikely to motivate or interest our pal Joe or anyone on the ACME board.

(@value) Can we integrate the concept of personal value with that of profit more tightly than our
    current financial system is capable of?


## Joe's Circumstances: Unresolved Internal Conflicts

We should know more about Joe. Joe is in his early 30's and has his life planned out. He thinks he
knows what he wants out of this job and where he wants to go. Yet, he is not confident in his plan
anymore and can't quite identify why. Joe's happily worked on much harder projects with tighter
deadlines before. This time feels different. He is not motivated and working on autopilot while
wishing he could just stop and do nothing. Have his values changed? Are his values in conflict with
one another? Are his circumstances in conflict with his values? How can we help him identify what's
going on so that he can work to improve his situation?

(@intent1) How can we get better at consciously identifying intentions and values of ourselves and
    others?

(@intent2) How can we get better at living up to our intentions and values?

(@intent3) How can we get better at consciously updating our intentions and values as our
    circumstances change?


## Joe's Intention: Achieve Financial Independence

Joe is on the road to financial independence and his family is willing to scrimp and save and live
frugally in the present in order to retire early in the future. Every bonus Joe earns is saved
towards this goal, bringing his early retirement date a little bit closer each time. But, especially
at times like this when working on a report all night, Joe wonders if he's sacrificing too much for
an uncertain pay off. Is the misery of this deadline worth the uncertain pay off of financial
freedom five or ten years down the line?

(@defer) When is a deferred payoff worthwhile?


## Joe's Intention: Live his Values

Joe is an avid outdoor enthusiast. He and his family love hiking, hunting, fishing, camping,
gardening -- any activity that brings them closer to nature. Part of Joe's identity is his love of
nature. But Joe's company, ACME Inc., is a conglomerate with a troubling relationship with the
natural world. ACME Inc. has stakes in petrochemical refineries and drilling, as well as two strip
mining operations. Joe rationalizes working for ACME by trying to change things from the inside, but
sometimes he wonders if he's just fooling himself. Joe knows that if the Tallahassee deal goes
through, one of the first actions ACME is likely to take is slash environmental oversight in their
operations. If Joe wants to ensure society has a sustainable ecological footprint and is concerned
that ACME is exceeding such boundaries, what is his most effective course of action for modifying
ACME's behavior? Is he more effective working within ACME or by not working for ACME?

(@conflict) When there is a values conflict, when is it better to engage and when is it better to
    disengage?


## Joe's Intention: Be Intentional With His Time

Joe is running against his deadline for a variety of reasons, but he will admit that he certainly
wasted a large piece of his working time on irrelevant activities. You see, Joe is a minor twitter
celebrity in the Do it Yourself and Maker communities. This past week there was a highly polarizing
debate in that community related to an article Joe published a week ago. The topic of the article
was how the DIY/Maker lifestyle will never be a common cultural paradigm unless the community
changes. Joe has been spending many hours since then reading and responding to discussion and debate
about his article. Despite his best intentions, multiple times a day he's found himself on the app
at a time he was not intending to be. Joe knows this interaction can't be healthy but can't seem to
stop himself. Is Joe playing on Twitter or is Twitter playing him?

(@corrupt) Can we identify when actions (ours or others) work to disrupt or corrupt our agency? If
   so, can we protect ourselves?


## Joe's Intention: Financial Independence through Decreasing Dependence on Yearly Income

Exacerbating the issue, the debate is revolves around central assumptions in Joe's plan for
financial independence -- which is the main reason Joe is trying to keep and succeed at his ACME
Inc. job.

You see, central to Joe's plan for financial independence is lowering his family's yearly income
requirements while keeping or increasing their quality of life. Since the factors most in his
control relate to food and maintenance costs, Joe got involved in the maker and DIY communities to
find ways to reduce his family's income requirements in those categories. But lately he's become
disillusioned by this effort as he's come to realize he spends nearly as much capital on DIY
resources as he would just by purchasing the commodity goods and services he's trying recreate at
home. When Joe factors in the time he's spent on these projects, his plan just doesn't make
financial sense. Not only does it usually take significant time when his projects go as planned, it
seems that every one of his efforts requires time to set up, debug, fix, and redo before he can
extract something worthwhile from his investment. what, Joe wonders, would need to change for a
DIY/Maker lifestyle to become more personally profitable?

(@diy) What would need to change for a DIY/Maker lifestyle to become more universally rewarding?


## Conclusion: Joe's Dilemma

Most likely Joe will carry on and deliver something good enough before his boss needs it the next
day. Joe will have to endure the damage to his health and relationships that the deadline imposed on
him. He will not be any closer to resolving his goals or questions, but he also won't have to deal
with the uncertainty and lack of security that he might incur were he to decide to do something
unexpected, such as quit, delay delivery, or even change the scope of the report to something that
reflected his personal values more closely.

In order for Joe to seriously consider options other than simply gritting his teeth and
perservering, he needs to change his negotiating position with his sources of conflict. This means
he must literally or metaphorically negotiate with forces internal and external to himself. In order
to increase his bargaining power, he can gather better information, or make his position more
formiddable through increasing his allies and or his own capabilities.

Joe's situation isn't very unique, and isn't intended to be. What Joe helps us illustrate is that
there are frequently multiple forces at play in any single decision point of our lives. Better
understanding those forces allows us to understand where convergence and where conflict is likely to
arise. Developing techniques to cultivate forces convergent to our values as well as to better
disrupt forces in conflict with our values is what The Animist Interface is all about.

Note that Our purpose isn't to universally solve the problems we discovered with Joe, rather to
create a method of analysis which helps us to better manage with these types of problems within our
personal contexts.

Joe's situation helps to illustrate the questions we hope to productively analyze. Our objective is
to create an integrative framework that's easy to apply to one stand-alone problem and increases its
value when integrated more tightly into your personal context.

Were Joe to use the principles of The Animist Interface, he would likely not find himself in the
predicament he is in now, and if he were he would not be questioning his decisions so strongly. Were
Joe to start using the principles of The Animist Interface at this moment of uncertainty, he would
be able to integrate all the information leading to his indecision and find a resolution he is
confident he will be able to live with.
