# Getting to Know the Dance Floor

## What Is It

When we dance with the stranger we do so within the environment of our own perception. The Stranger
does not disclose the nature of their dance, but only provides hints through their
action. Everything tied to our agency---actions, affordances, obstacles, intentions, etc.---are
inherently a product of our perception. Whereas the "dance" points to how the stranger and our
selves move with and against one another, the "dance floor" points to the space wherein we
dance. This is not necessarily any physical location, it may be any medium that affords
communication -- the capacity to sense and to respond. The dance is shared movement. The dance floor
is shared space. This space is not ours, it is not theirs, it is our commons. Within the space of
our dance floor, we must use our senses to discern other beings, obstacles, and opportunities. How
we act on this floor depends both on the dance we chose and on how the stranger chooses to dance
with us.

Although the dance floor does not define our agency, it constrains it. These constraints come from
how our individual boundaries intersect with the space and other entities within it, as well as the
affordances, opportunities, and dangers we perceive within the space.

Our capacity to dance well therefore critically depends on our understanding of the space wherein we
dance. When we become aware of our dance, dance floor, and dancers, then we are better equipped to
discover the joy and meaning within it. We must step gently with our partners, avoiding their toes,
anticipating their delight as well as our own. We must gently lead our dance away from the other
dancers too caught in their own business to notice us. We must learn new steps afforded by the space
and teach our partners what we have learned. We must transform ourselves in the costume of the dance
we lead, and gracefully shed that costume once the nature of the dance changes. We must acknowledge
the space itself, treating it as a fellow dance partner and help ensure its well being and
availability for the dance.

All of this is to say that the dance is always an interplay between the boundary of the space known
as self, and the space within which the self finds itself. This boundary is constantly moving as the
self and the other relate to one another. Our capacity to dance well critically depends on our
capacity to perceive and anticipate the potential constraints and affordances as our selves
interrelate with the dancers within and of our dance floor.

We have choice. We have the capacity to choose the space within which we dance, how we dance within
that space, and even what self we embody in that dance. All these choices are constrained, but those
constraints are malleable and part of the dance itself. This is all to say what dance we dance
depends on the boundaries we embody and how we sense, anticipate, and interpret the potentials
inherent in those boundaries. What it is to be a self is inherently a sense of individual
perspective. A self relates to the world through the unique reference point of where the self
perceives its center to lie. Action and perception are all interpreted in reference to this
perspective. The language of the self is one that interprets the world through this reference,
dividing and measuring the world by cleaving it into two halves: that which is internal, and that
which is external.

For a self to exist it must perform this cleaving into internal and external. This implies a
boundary must exist that portions reality into these two spaces. For such a boundary to define a
self, the boundary must be enclosed, yet porous and malleable as well. We may find cognitive,
embodied self to exist within many such self-boundaries. By living within the inner space of each
such boundary, we dance as many selves. Each action we perform modifies the contours of those
boundaries within each dance floor they occupy. While we may focus on one particular dance at a
time, each one is intertwined and we dance as all our selves for every step we take.

Crucially then, how well we dance depends on our anticipation and awareness of how the boundary
between the dancer and the dance floor changes. This is doubly true, for not only must we anticipate
our own available moves within all the selves we embody, we must also anticipate the moves of our
fellow partners, those who also exist within our shared commons and who dance their own separate
dances.

We operate in the real world of context and nuance. Nevertheless, our capacity to lead, or at least
be a peer in the dance depends on our ability to constrain and simplify reality into a frame we can
cognitively process. Just as pressure and temperature are not real, but abstractions related to the
aggregate properties of material in a bounded space, if we can sense that which is not real but is
truthfully representative of our surroundings, then we can better extend grace and virtue into our
dance by increasing our anticipation and delight in the unfolding movement between self and
stranger.

What then seems to be missing from our ontology is a language of the dance. Such a language would
orient us towards the salience of that which separates the dance from the dancers from the dance
floor. This dance is not simply the dancers nor the space within which they dance, the dance speaks
to the relationships between them. Dancing with the stranger implies awareness of the movement, of
the give and of the take, the absorption and expulsion, the bending and breaking, the flow and
repulsion that exists between the dancers and their shared space. Each boundary both constrains and
affords action. Boundaries define potentials and based on their context and the available diffusion
gradients within the substrate.

As boundaries change, the space and the dancers change as well. When the self has access and
awareness to the type and taxonomy of the boundaries they are constituted through as well as those
of their dancing partners, then such change becomes intentional instead of accidental. When we dance
with intention, then we dance such that our partners and our selves can delight in our mutual
unfolding. A taxonomy of the boundaries of self-hood would not constrain our action, rather it would
increase the affordances available to our action. Such an understanding would afford deeper
precision and greater power to our dance. By understanding that the dance itself is a process of
changing boundaries, we understand that our knowledge, wisdom, and rationality are all dependent on
a deep and ontologically sound discrimination into the nature of such boundaries.


## Substrate

In one representation there can be many different dance floors, for all that's necessary is a space
wherein boundaries may constitute and flow. In another representation there is only one dance floor,
for each other floor is itself just a constituent of some other underlying substrate.

Each Substrate is a local automata preserving rule set

Each such substrate has a corollary where there exists some configuration of initial conditions of
instantiatable states where the following is true for any "instantiable state".

Those conditions correspond to a division of the the substrate into executable and material
divisions, such that the whole of the substrate contains both properties.

The state of whats executable and what is material update such that some fundamental dynamic is
formed:

Certain updates keep the system propagating, whereas certain configurations devolve into stasis as
the order of local rules break down and no longer introduce change into the system,

This partitions the set into interesting (changing) and boring (static) subsets.

If one substrate "imbued" with the characteristics of "local properties" such that each "turn of the
crank" affected the underlying ruleset as well as the memory manifold, then it would be the case
that there existed some distributions of random behavior that when operated through would
preserve these properties:

- The rule set would stay constant through multiple plays enough that another level of derived
  automata exist with sufficient regularity.
- If These derived automata come up with sufficient regularity in the evolved automata substrate,
  then then something in the behavior of their calculated steps over time, such that keeping history
  over play affords an increasing understanding of the "derived" us base distributions and rules in
  play.
- Moreover, such derived automata can link into more complex calculating structures that
  themselves have the characteristics an automata substrate
- Multiple such derived substrates are instantiable
- Each such substrate will be capable of encoding unique paradox with respect to its constituent
  substrate
- Such paradoxes become a means of comparing substrates, for the operating axioms/rules of any two
  substrate are not necessarily comparable except with reference to the axioms/rules of their
  underlying shaved constituent substrate.
- By constructing paradoxes in one system/substrate and interpreting their resolution in another,
  something about the nature of their shared constituent nature is revealed.
- The systems can be modified to then encode such new information, at which point the systems are
  entangled and effectively function as a single substrate.
- Introducing more substrates & repeating this process
  enables deeper plumbing into the nature of the shared root substrates.
- In effect, this is a type of logical parallax or holographic effect where truth is found in
  paradox by "lining up" paradoxes in "independent" systems and paying attention to the manner in
  which they interact.

## Taxonomy of Self Boundaries

What then? What is this taxonomy by which we can find the contours of the dance? What benefit comes
from slicing the world this way? This concept of boundary contains four elements: the substrate
wherein the boundary lies, then a slicing of that substrate into an interior and an exterior space,
as well as the boundary itself that coexists within the interior and exterior simultaneously. When
we speak of boundaries we speak of topographically closed manifolds. This does not imply they are
impermeable, rather a boundary stops being a boundary when we cannot discriminate between interior
and exterior. Then it is simply a configuration of the encompassing substrate. A boundary then has
two representations: first it is represented in the language of the substrate. Within the language
of the substrate, i.e. the dance floor, a boundary is simply a contiguous pattern within that
space. Yet by slicing the substrate into an interior and exterior, a new perspective is born through
creation of a an interior point of reference. In this new language, each boundary develops a
symbolism that represents movement, flow and change relating the interior to the exterior. This is
where the self originates, the self is the interior point of reference. Within the self's language,
each boundary is invisible but carves the self from the space it is embedded within. Each self has
no direct access to the field of the space, and its language is never directly perceived. Instead,
the self represents its boundary within its own ontology based on the flow and relative relation of
phenomena to the self-boundary. When the self recognizes its self-hood as constituted by the space,
then it can attempt to translate and map its own internal language into a representative language
that better models the objective nature of the space, but it can never know the nature of its
constituent reality directly.

To create a taxonomy of boundary we must use our representative language of the dance floor to
identify patterns by which a self might differentiate from the field. Each of these patterns encodes
a particular flow and binding property. A boundary is only complete when it creates a closed network
between boundary entities, where each boundary entity represents a relation between the symbolism
and flow between the nature of self to not self. These boundaries stretch grow shrink orient and
move within the field of the dance floor in response to the forces brought forth through both the
fields effect on keeping boundary elements properly linked, and the pressures experienced by the
self as it senses and responds to the dynamics it senses between the context interpreted as self and
that experienced as other.

Our taxonomy is defined as follows:

Each substrate is a space, wherein each location in that space is afforded properties.

The properties of each location are partially dependent on the properties of each adjacent location
based on the execution rules of the substrate.

Boundary elements may be constructed with such points, where each element is a connected subset of
locations, where that connected subspace matches a type that defines certain property and structural
relationships.

When boundary elements create a boundary, they define a closed manifold within the space. By
definition this is manifold's dimension is one less than the space itself.

The manifold encompasses a volume and geometry of the substrate based on the structure of the
manifold.

The contents of the interior volume, so long as the manifold's integrity is not compromised, is a
function of the interior processes as well as the selective permeability characteristics of the
manifold.

The manifold, by incorporating unique automata within its composition can selectively sense and
respond to exterior phenomena based on different modalities specific to the functional
characteristics of the specific automata.

Thus, such boundary automata can selectively respond to external phenomena, creating arbitrarily
complex selection criteria as well as output action/signals. These can then feed back into the
structure, changing the responsitivity in a dynamical manner.

Such structures become dynamically stable when the dynamical nature works to normatively "value" the
boundary condition, thereby focusing its selection and action structures on maintaining that initial
condition.


## Inferring Intention from Boundary Knowledge

If the above can be well defined, then given a boundary condition we can infer likely
intentions. This enables us to map emotions and agency onto phenomena we usually can't communicate
directly with, such as plants, species, social groups, subsets of our selves,

We can simulate changes to boundary conditions-in order to infer likely changes in
intention. Technology introduces new social groups AND changes in capacity/boundary conditions.

If we can put an ecosystem of agent:boundaries, we can infer both intentions and capacities, When
intentions conflict within a shared space, the cleverest * strongest capacity has higher probability
of mapping intention to successful action.

If we can infer likely "action winner" without having to have a full fidelity agent, just a
definition of boundary conditions & RR set points,

better understand & engineer power we can structures in society & nature.

We can use such definitions for sense making & regulation as well.

Model must define Normativity & Transfer as a balance of energy & material based on some concept of
procedure(inventory) => change to internal state

Each AE senses and acts differently, thereby using a different symbolic grammar to partition
interaction with the stranger. This grammar is a derivative of the boundary structures that define
the entity. The structure and function of those boundary entities is derivative of the rules and
dynamics of their underlying substrate.

For Boundary Manifold sensing apparatus, perspective relations shift for internal & external. For
external, more distant objects appear smaller, whereas internal objects, at least in aggregate, due
to duplication in signal across distributed sensors appear more salient than objects closer to one
sensor. Essentially there's a difference in-parralax effects for interior vs exterior sensing
modalities.

## Normative Dimension

Each AE type may exist within multiple substrates simultaneously (if structured appropriately). For
each substrate, the AE will have a boundary condition, the function of which is to cognitively
define interior vs exterior symbolism. Interior symbolism defines the entities capacities and
normative dimension within that substrate. The exterior symbolism defines the perceived affordances
within the substrate. Affordances are 'inventory', and 'challenges' necessary to transform exterior
phenomena into internal capacities as well as preserve current capacities. Affordances multiplied
through normativity results in intentions. Intentions multiplied through capacities sorts into
potential actions. Potential actions are (sorted? coordinated) through ?? into action.

Actions occur through boundary procedures such that (balance of above), as well as internal
inventory is a function of boundary_procedure(external inventory, internal capacities/inventory) ->
internal capacities/inventory.

Internal capacities/inventory (measurable via a boundary operation), each get a normative direction
and a normalized quantification property. Such that this becomes the normative dimension used to
provoke intention/action is produced from.

Such Normative Measures Must Be Local, non recursive such that each is computable

A major benefit of this idea of normative orders is that natural normative senses are by definition
in-situ, whereas when we explicate normative equations, we can introduce "remote sensing", changing
our perspective on the symbolic properties that we care about, This changes the technic of our
boundaries, so must be performed with caution and awareness of second and third order effects.

Sensing always parses in the language of the AE, although that Automata is constructed with the
language of underlying substrates.

Actual 'Normative balancing" must come through parallel processes of
- An act of sensing and homeostasis in the language of mind
- A process of degradation or growth in the language of the boundaries


## Buildonomy

- a pair of spectacles to better participate in "councils of all beings"

- a method to find your totem

- a frame for orienting technic into self

but what?

- Buildonomy is a substrate within which

    - Model Instance Aggregate, where aggregate becomes a feedback loop onto further refining of
      model structure and instance behavior, as all 'telemetry' points to value, so by identifying a
      measurement as valuable to collect we can enact a process of discovery about what that
      particular datum speaks to in terms of substrates, boundaries, and normative orders. This
      information increases the usefulnes of the model, and also increases the fittedness of the
      instance when in instantiates such values in its real context.

    - dances

       - (automata as technic/boundary elements)
       - Council of all beings (ecological view)
