# What is Engineering?

When I was a kid I wanted to be a garbage man, then an astronaut, then a physicist, then I finally
settled on rocket scientist. What do these all have in common? Well if we ignore the first one, its
pretty clear I've loved exploration and space since an early age. Even picking up garbage has a
certain kind of exploration in it. Much of what we learn from social sciences is by looking at what
we throw away or what we hoard. I think its safe to say I've always imagined myself as an explorer
in one shape or another, be it of our internal or external worlds. Most of my education was spent
training to explore that most external of worlds---outer space---but most of my career has actually
been oriented towards our internal worlds. In a way, I have become that garbage man that I initially
set out to be.

The 1995 movie Apollo 13 was a turning point for me. I was nine years old and wanted to become an
astronaut. After seeing the film, I remember searching the newspaper for stories about NASA
developments and even saving clippings. NASA's new shuttle replacement, the [Venture
Star](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VentureStar), was going to bring us closer than ever to outer
space! A science fiction future was around the corner! As the years dragged on, and shuttle launches
kept their terribly slow pace I started to grow disheartened. Why wasn't NASA making progress? Even
at that age I realized there was no way I was going to be an astronaut if there were only a handful
of people going to space each year. Things would have to dramatically change before that became a
real possibility.

Soon after, I learned about the [X Prize](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansari_X_Prize), a
competition challenging non-governmental organizations to launch a reusable crewed spacecraft to
beyond the [edge of space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C3%A1rm%C3%A1n_line) and repeat the feat
within two weeks of the first successful attempt. It's through this competition that I learned that
other people were feeling the same way as me about NASA.  Why weren't we making real progress on
exploring outer space? We had been to the Moon and now we were stuck in low earth orbit, and even
that was only happening a couple times a year. Why was outer space so hard? Why was it so expensive?
It would be a while until I found out.

For me, NASA lost much of its glamour in that next decade following watching Apollo 13 the movie. I
still loved space but the commercial pioneers started to capture more of my attention, first Burt
Rutan, then Elon Musk. Maybe these iconoclasts knew something that NASA and their army of
sub-contractors never could figure out (or had more likely forgotten)? Could it be that pure genius
and guts were all it took?  Was space finally close enough that I could go there in my lifetime?
Maybe all it took was a blank sheet approach and the right design and this wall would come tumbling
down.

I entered University of Michigan as an aspiring aerospace engineer. I would leave five years later
with a bachelor's in Aerospace Engineering, a Masters in Space Systems Engineering and a minor in
German. Here I started to learn the scope of the problem. There is so much to learn in order to
simply understand a small piece of what's necessary to build something as complicated as a rocket or
an airplane. Thermodynamics, Aerodynamics, Mechanics, Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, and
Computer Science are just some of the specialties that need to be integrated in order to put
together aerospace technology. Each discipline takes an entire career to master. Stitching them
together such that each discipline can coordinate with one another and work together as a
differentiated whole makes the problems of each individual expertise exponentially more difficult to
overcome.

In essence, any sufficiently large multi-discipline project becomes a
[hyperobject](https://www.upress.umn.edu/book-division/books/hyperobjects), an object "of such vast
temporal and spatial dimensions that [it defeats] traditional ideas about what a thing is in the
first place". To engineer is fundamentally a creative act. When we engineer at the limits of our
capabilities, such as in aerospace engineering, biomedicine, or any other high-technology area of
expertise we must create and imagine together. What we are trying to fashion exceeds any of our
individual capacities to grasp. When we ride a jet plane, hold a cell phone, or get vaccinated we
are only seeing the barest surface of the entire object formed by the people, ideas, places, and
tools necessary to provides each of those functions.

At university, I experienced how difficult modern technology is to create in two ways: an education
in the physics and mathematics used to for certain analyses that are "owned" by engineering
disciplines such as aerodynamics, control engineering, thermodynamics, and dynamics and structural
mechanics. Here I started to grasp just how non-intuitive and incomprehensible the base features of
reality can be. It is amazing that we have any grasp on these physical features at all.

In addition, as a team member and then project lead for a student engineering group I started to
understand how different real engineering is versus the analytical tools used in engineering. Real
engineering uses these specialized fields of analysis just as real engineering uses screwdrivers,
lathes, and blast furnaces. Each one is a tool, it is not the function itself. In actuality, the
function of engineering is similar to politics. Engineering is about uniting and coordinating a team
that is both capable and motivated to accomplish a particular task that is beyond any of their
individual capacities to tackle. When we train engineers, we are training people into a particular
protocol that enables us to unite and coordinate such that together we can create and change
hyperobjects.

For all five years I was at university I worked on a quixotic project. We called ourselves MClimber,
short for Michigan Climber, and we wanted to win a NASA Centennial Challenge. These centennial
challenges were set up in response to the success of the first X Prize and sought to galvanize
progress across a few "moonshots" related to space exploration. MClimber was a competitor in the
power beaming Centennial Challenge. We were trying to develop technology needed to one day build a
functioning [space elevator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_elevator). We were building a
tether climbing robot that who's power was beamed from the ground rather than stored on board or
transmitted through a cable. Needless to say, we failed, but [we learned a lot along the
way](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AIPC.1230..271B/abstract). The details of our design and
the competition are not relevant to this story, but the lessons certainly are. You see, by my nature
I have always tried to do things by myself. I see every challenge as an opportunity for self
improvement. A childhood playing Role Playing Games taught me that every challenge is an opportunity
for experience and level ups. This mindset does not work when working on a team unless one is
focused on 'leveling up' leadership, which I have never been intrinsically interested in.

I was inspired by how I imagined my engineering role models must work. Sure those notable figure
heads of technology such as Kelly Johnson of Skunk Works, Burt Rutan of Scaled Composites, and Elon
Musk of SpaceX all had teams but they were calling the shots. They were crafting their creations
like an artist brings their piece to life. They had teams but those teams were there to support
their vision and simply to follow their direction. That is how the real technology disruptors
operate and I wanted to be one of them.

When a subsystem on the project needed help, I focused on _making_ that subsystem rather than
recruiting and motivating the subsystem team to step up to the challenge. Learning skills is far
easier than coordinating people, so I tried to stitch together the functions necessary to succeed at
the competition through the bare power of my will. Tools are not teammates, and my available time,
and skills would never be sufficient to design, build, and test a technology as complex as a power
beaming robot. Engineering at the hinterlands of our technological landscape is not a recipe for
success. Hyperobjects by definition will not conform to any single individual's talent.

When I started working at SpaceX after completing my Master's degree I started to learn how the
sausage is really made.

At SpaceX I worked closely with the Flight Software team. I was not a software engineer, but rather
served a supporting role to that team. At any other company I would be called a systems engineer,
but at SpaceX we were all systems engineers, a directive that came straight from the boss man
Elon. My title changed a few times in the eight years I was with the company, but purpose of the job
did not. I was in charge of defining, and inspecting the processes, procedures and design elements
that made SpaceX flight software safe enough and reliable enough that the government could entrust
us to fly a rocket and spacecraft to the international space station and back.

In this role, I primarily acted as an interface between NASA and SpaceX, working to translate
between "SpaceX-ese" and "NASA-ese" so that these two organizations could better understand and
dialogue with one another. Neither wants to screw up, but beyond that their motivations and core
assumptions were wildly different.

In my experience NASA worked via trusting the process while SpaceX by trusting the individual. The
truth is much more complicated than that, yes generalizations are dangerous, but great for making a
point. Both use process, both rely on individual responsibility but the difference is in the
relation between the two. Does the individual serve the process or does the process serve the
individual? Both approaches have benefits and drawbacks. Process-first development is slow and
expensive when developing high technologies, but the personnel are less susceptible to burn
out. Individual-first focused development is faster and cheaper, but finding and retaining the
necessary talent to accomplish your goals is a real risk. Judging by track records, both approaches
may be similarly effective at creating something that achieves the desired goals, but processed
based approaches have the advantage that the risks are more legible across the organization (or at
least give that appearance).

Through this journey I started to get a feeling that something was deeply maladapted about the way
we go about working together on collective projects. In a sense, SpaceX and NASA both represent
different poles on a spectrum of theories of organization. They represent thesis and antithesis to
one another. What then is their synthesis?

I've had a hard time creating an "elevator pitch" for what my core interests are ever since I really
started being an engineer. I've always been most happy as a systems engineer but I've always been
dissatisfied with the process and toolbox a traditional systems engineering education promotes. One
cannot extract systems engineering into its own discipline, for by its nature systems engineering is
the very substrate upon which the entire organization must coordinate. In essence I agree with the
SpaceX approach. The proper order of process and individual is that the individual uses the process
as a tool, not that the individual serves the process. I just don't believe we have the protocol in
place that can really make that paradigm scale to meet our current challenges.

Similar to 



Western culture has quickly surpassed
its continental home and become a global force. There are certain stereotypes that define western
culture -- largely defined by the enlightenment. Personal freedom as the foundational value
preserved by government, financial markets, and corporate entities. 

I'm about to generalize across a broad swath of what defines western culture. Its dangerous to
generalize, but often it's the only way to clearly get your point across. My generalization is that
by their very nature, the modern idea of a company is an anti-social structure.But there's hope. It
doesn't have to be that way. If we can just make 

My perspective comes from
working in aerospace and technology corporations as well as absorbing opinion pieces and work such
as "Debt: the First 5000 years", 

