# What is Engineering?

![A sky full of stars (Joshua Earle joshuaearle, CC0, via Wikimedia Commons)](10_introduction/figures/a_sky_full_of_stars.jpg){#a-sky-full-of-stars width=75%}

When I was a kid I wanted to be a garbage man, then an astronaut, then a physicist, then finally I
settled on rocket scientist. What do all these have in common? If we ignore the first one, it's
pretty clear I've loved exploring since an early age. Even picking up garbage speaks to a certain
kind of exploration. Much of what we've learned about social sciences is through looking at what we
throw away and what we hoard. I think it's safe to say I've always imagined myself as an explorer in
one shape or another, be it of our internal or external worlds. Most of my education was spent
training to explore that most external of worlds---outer space---but most of my career has actually
been oriented towards our internal worlds. In a way, I have become that garbage man that I initially
set out to be.

The 1995 movie Apollo 13 was a turning point for me. I was nine years old and wanted to become an
astronaut. After seeing the film, I remember reading the science section of our local newspaper
every week looking for stories about NASA. I even saved article clippings. NASA's new shuttle
replacement, the [Venture Star](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VentureStar), was going to bring us
closer than ever to outer space! A science fiction future was around the corner! As the years
dragged on, and shuttle launches kept their terribly slow pace and terribly high cost I started to
grow disheartened. Why wasn't NASA making progress? Even at that age I realized there was no way I
was going to be an astronaut if there were only a handful of people going to space each year and
they were only funded by the government. Things would have to dramatically change before that became
a real possibility.

![Apollo 13 movie poster (Imagine Entertainment and Universal Pictures)](10_introduction/figures/Apollo_thirteen_movie.jpg){#apollo-13 width=75%}

A couple years after Apollo 13, I learned about the [X
Prize](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansari_X_Prize), a competition challenging non-governmental
organizations to launch a reusable crewed spacecraft to beyond the [edge of
space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C3%A1rm%C3%A1n_line) and repeat the feat within two weeks of
the first successful attempt. Through this competition I learned other people were feeling the same
way as me about NASA. Why couldn't we make real progress on exploring outer space? We went to the
Moon, now we were stuck in low earth orbit. Even that was only happening a couple times a year. Why
was outer space so hard? Why was it so expensive? It would be a while until I found out.

NASA lost much of its glamour in that next decade after I watched Apollo 13 the movie. I still loved
space but the commercial sector began to capture most of my attention. I had new heros, first Burt
Rutan, then Elon Musk. Maybe these iconoclasts knew something that NASA and their army of
sub-contractors never could figure out (or had more likely forgotten)? Could it be that pure genius
and guts were all it took? Was space finally close enough that I could go there in my lifetime?
Maybe all it took was a blank sheet design and problem could be solved.

I entered University of Michigan as an aspiring aerospace engineer. I left five years later with a
bachelor's in Aerospace Engineering, a Masters in Space Systems Engineering. Here I started to learn
the scope of the problem. There is so much to learn in order to simply understand a small piece of
what's necessary to build something as complicated as a rocket or an airplane. Thermodynamics,
Aerodynamics, Mechanics, Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, and Computer Science are just some of
the specialties that need to be integrated in order to put together aerospace technology. Each
discipline takes an entire career to master. Stitching them together such that each discipline can
coordinate with one another and work together as a differentiated whole makes the problems of each
individual expertise exponentially more difficult to overcome.

In essence, any sufficiently large multi-discipline project becomes a
[hyperobject](https://www.upress.umn.edu/book-division/books/hyperobjects), an object "of such vast
temporal and spatial dimensions that [it defeats] traditional ideas about what a thing is in the
first place". To engineer is fundamentally a creative act. When we engineer at the limits of our
capabilities, such as in aerospace engineering, biomedicine, or any other high-technology area of
expertise we must create and imagine together because the scope of what we attempt to create defeats
our individual capacities. When we ride a jet plane, hold a cell phone, or get vaccinated we are
only seeing the barest surface of the entire object formed by the people, ideas, places, and tools
necessary to provide each of those functions.

![Me, with laser glasses](10_introduction/figures/laser_lyjak.jpg){#laser-lyjak width=70%}

At university, I experienced how difficult it is to create new technologies in two ways: an
education in the physics and mathematics used by the engineering disciplines of aerodynamics,
control engineering, thermodynamics, and dynamics and structural mechanics. Here I started to grasp
how non-intuitive and incomprehensible the base features of reality can be. It is amazing that we
have any capacity to control physics at all.

As a team member then project lead for a student engineering group I started to understand how
different practicing real engineering is versus learning the analytical tools used when
engineering. Real engineering uses specialized fields of analysis just as real engineering uses
screwdrivers, lathes, and blast furnaces. Engineering uses many specialized tools, fields of
analysis are not the function of engineering itself. In actuality, engineering is similar to
politics. Engineering is about uniting and coordinating a team that is both capable and motivated to
accomplish a particular task that is beyond the reach of any of their individual capacities. When we
train engineers, we are training people into a particular protocol that enable them to unite and
coordinate such that together they can manipulate hyperobjects.

![MClimber v1 on its way up (Las Cruces New Mexico, October 2006)](10_introduction/figures/MClimberOnTheWayUp.jpg)

For all five years I was at university I worked on a quixotic project. We called ourselves MClimber,
and we wanted to win a NASA Centennial Challenge. The [Centennial
Challenges](https://www.nasa.gov/directorates/spacetech/centennial_challenges/overview.html) were
set up in response to the success of the first X Prize and seek to galvanize progress and public
involvement across many "moonshots" related to space exploration. MClimber was a competitor in the
power beaming Centennial Challenge. The purpose was to develop technology needed to one day build a
functioning [space elevator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_elevator) by building a tether
climbing robot that who's power was beamed from the ground rather than stored on board or
transmitted through a cable. MClimber failed, but [we learned a lot along the
way](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AIPC.1230..271B/abstract). The details of our design and
the competition are not relevant to this story, but the lessons certainly are. You see, by my nature
I have always tried to do things by myself. I'm inclined to approach every challenge as an
opportunity for self improvement. A childhood playing Role Playing Games taught me that every
challenge is an opportunity for experience, for "leveling up". This mindset does not work when
working on a team (unless one is focused on 'leveling up' leadership, which I have never been very
interested in).

![The Team (Michigan, October 2009)](10_introduction/figures/the_team.jpg)

At this point, I was inspired by how I imagined my engineering role models operate. In my head,
people like Kelly Johnson of Skunk Works, Burt Rutan of Scaled Composites, and Elon Musk of SpaceX
brought forth their creations by the power of their individual genus. Sure, they had teams but
_they_ were calling the shots. They were the artists. Their teams were just tools to help them
realize their vision. That is how the real technology disruptors operate and I wanted to be one of
them.

![Power Test (October 2009)](10_introduction/figures/power_test.jpg)
![Tracking Test (November 2009)](10_introduction/figures/tracking_test_setup.jpg)

When a subsystem on the project needed help, I focused on _making_ that subsystem rather than making
the team step up to the challenge. Learning skills is far easier than coordinating people, so I
tried to stitch together the functions necessary to succeed at the competition through the bare
power of my will. Tools are not teammates, and my available time, and skills would never be
sufficient to design, build, and test a technology as complex as a power beaming robot. Engineering
by oneself is not a recipe for success. Hyperobjects by definition will not conform to any single
individual's talent.

![Exhaustion (November 2009)](10_introduction/figures/tracking_test_exhaustion.jpg)

When I started working at SpaceX after completing my Master's degree I started to learn how the
sausage is really made.

At SpaceX, I worked closely with the Flight Software team. I was not a software engineer, but rather
served a supporting role. At any other company I would be called a systems engineer, but at SpaceX
we were all systems engineers, a directive that came straight from the boss man Elon. My title
changed a few times in the eight years I was with the company, but purpose of my job did not. I was
in charge of defining and describing the processes that made SpaceX flight software safe and
reliable enough that the government could trust us to fly missions to the International Space
Station.

In this role, I primarily acted as an interface between NASA and SpaceX, working to translate
between "SpaceX-ese" and "NASA-ese" so that these two organizations could better understand and
dialogue with one another. Neither wants to screw up, but beyond that their motivations and core
assumptions were wildly different.

In my experience, NASA works by trusting their processes while SpaceX works by trusting their
engineers. The truth is much more complicated than that, yes generalizations are dangerous, but
great for making a point. Both use process, both rely on individual responsibility but the
difference is in the relation between the two. Does the individual serve the process or does the
process serve the individual? Both approaches have pros and cons. Process-first development is slow
and expensive when developing new technology, but personnel are less susceptible to burn
out. Engineer-first development is faster and cheaper, but finding and retaining the necessary
talent to accomplish challenging goals is a real risk. Judging by track records, both approaches may
be similarly effective at creating something that achieves the desired goals, but processed based
approaches have the advantage that the risks are more legible across the organization (or at least
give that appearance).

I feel that something is deeply maladapted about the way we go about working together on collective
projects. In a sense, SpaceX and NASA both represent opposing poles on a spectrum of organizational
theories. They represent thesis and antithesis to one another. NASA's engineering is most
characterized by their artifacts: their standards, requirements, and processes by which they
constrain their engineering. SpaceX's engineering is most characterized by their people. What then
is their synthesis?

I've had a hard time creating an "elevator pitch" for what my core interests are ever since I really
started being an engineer. I've always been most fulfilled as a systems engineer but I've always
been dissatisfied with the process and toolbox a traditional systems engineering education
promotes. One cannot extract systems engineering into its own discipline, for by its nature systems
engineering is the very substrate by which an engineering organization coordinates. If I have to
pick sides I agree with the SpaceX approach. The proper ordering of process versus individual is
that the individual uses processes as tools, not that individual creativity is fundamentally
constrained by process. I just don't believe we have the protocol in place that makes the SpaceX
paradigm scale to meet our global challenges. When primacy is placed on the individual it means our
collective work must be collaborative, it must be social. It cannot be rigid or tyrannical. This is
what it is to engineer, it is to be creative together within our shared social reality.

In the late nineties when I became disillusioned with NASA, I found I was not alone. In fact there
were other people who even had a theory as to how to how the status quo could be improved and the
gumption to test their ideas. I'm talking about the new space pioneers who found their calling
through the X Prize and the later space commercialization efforts exemplified by SpaceX. Similar to
that moment I believe there's an even grander change afoot.

Unlike that moment, diagnosing the root problem here is much less legible. Here's my
attempt. Collectively we are increasingly aware that our orientation towards reality is not
optimal. Our beliefs about the nature of reality are in need of a reset. The main fissure is that
objective and subjective reality are much closer together than we have been led to
believe. Objectivity and subjectivity are not a dualism but rather a spectrum. At their extremes
they are paradoxical, but reality is defined by their mixture. We can reframe and resolve many
contemporary issues when we realize we are treating some ideas as being more objective than they
actually are, and other ideas as much more subjective than is really the case.

We are entering a moment of collective [kairos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kairos). We are
starting to understand all the different symptoms of our cultural malaise. What I found in systems
engineering is simply one manifestation of the problem. I believe we may yet find the wisdom to act
at the moment of kairos and positively reorient society towards a new equilibrium point. The moment
is almost upon us, it is not yet passed so whether we make it or not remains to be seen. The purpose
of buildonomy is to participate in this moment, acting within my niche of systems engineering. I
believe the full potential for engineering to be both deeply personally rewarding and culturally
meaningful is much greater than has yet been realized. It is only when we can collectively and
dynamically realize relevance, balancing between the two poles of individual genius and collective
process that we will unleash the full potential of the creative collective spirit of transformation
that engineering represents.
